The present study was conducted in accordance with the guidelines of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources of Mexico (SEMARNAT) under Research Permits DGVS00910/13 and DGVS02716/14. Each permit authorized our research activities with a wild population of spider monkeys (an endangered species) within the Otoch Ma’ax Yetel Kooh protected area in Mexico, during 2013 and 2014 respectively. None of the authors had any direct or indirect interaction with the primates in the study.

Field data were collected in the Otoch Ma’ax Yetel Kooh protected area in the Yucatan peninsula, Mexico. The 5367 ha area is composed of a mosaic of semi-evergreen forest with different successional stages [90]. Average annual temperature fluctuates around 24°C peaking in August, and 70% of annual rainfall is typically concentrated between the months of May and October [91].

The study was conducted on a habituated group of black handed spider monkeys (Ateles geoffroyi) ranging around the south-eastern side of the lake located on the eastern margin of the protected area, very close to the village of Punta Laguna [41]. The group has been subject to continuous monitoring since 1997 by local field assistants, researchers and students. Except for infants (age: 0–3 years), group members are all identified through distinctive facial or body marks [92]. Males are the phylopatric sex in this species, while females born in the group usually emigrate at 5–6 years. Before this age, individuals are considered infants or juveniles (age: 3–5 years) and usually move and forage together with their mothers. In this study, we only considered individuals that were five years old by January 2013, additionally excluding group-born females with no offspring, because they mostly followed their mothers, and they all emigrated during the study. This subset comprises all group-members assumed to have independent movement patterns, and will henceforth be referred to as adults. During the study, group size fluctuated between 18 (7 male and 11 female) and 22 (7 male, 15 females) adults due to the integration of four females, two of which had been sporadically observed in the periphery of the group’s home range since 2012. During 2013 three of these females (all with offspring) increased their frequency of visits to the core area of the group, associating regularly with group members and continuing to do so through the rest of the study. All males analyzed were born in the group and both their age and mother are known. Adult female ages and maternity relations are unknown (except for that of a 9 year old natal female (LO) who has reproduced repeatedly in the group) and their tenure in the group varies from 5 to over 18 years for three females which were already part of the group by 1997 when they were first observed.

Throughout a 20 month-period between January 3rd 2013 and September 18th 2014, data were collected by four field assistants (each with over ten years of experience) and one of the authors (SESA), following the same standard methodology implemented at the study site since 1998 [92]. We conducted observations during subgroup follows of 4–8 daily hours which began after opportunistically locating monkeys by searching commonly used areas within the home range. Once a subgroup was spotted, we began our instantaneous scan observations every 20-min registering its composition, position, and the identity and activity of all visible individuals. We obtained the subgroup position using a hand-held global positioning system placed roughly below one of the individuals of the subgroup (mean error in locations was 7 m). Any monkey within 30 meters of another was considered part of the same subgroup [20,93]. This cutoff distance is based on analyses of the distribution of inter-individual distances and has been validated using empirical [93] and modeling [20] methods. When individuals joined a subgroup, we recorded a fusion if they remained present in the following scan. When individuals were out of sight for two consecutive scans, we recorded this event as a fission. Our data comprise 4916 subgroup scans collected during 325 days within four seasons: dry 2013, wet 2013, dry 2014 and wet 2014. For all our analyses, we defined seasons as beginning in November 15th (dry) and May 15th (wet).

For a general estimate of fruit availability within the study site, we used an index of fruit abundance [45] calculated using data from a phenological trail monitored fortnightly, recording the presence or absence of fruit in 10 individual trees of each of 11 tree species most consumed by the study group over the long-term [94]. We also used tree-density estimations for these species, and measures of the diameter at breast height (DBH) obtained from trees (larger than 10 cm DBH) in forty-eight 100 x 2 m2 linear transects and four square transects of 0.25 ha in the study site [95]. The index of fruit abundance is the resulting sum of the proportion of trees with fruit (out of 10) from each species per fortnight, multiplied by the density (individuals/ha) and the sum of the DBH per ha for each species [45]. An example calculation for species Sideroxylon foetidissimum in one fortnight would be: 8/10 fruiting trees * 12 trees/ha * 150cm/ha = 1440 (trees*cm)/ha2. This was done for each species with fruit during a given fortnight, and the resulting numbers were added to obtain the index for that particular period. Values of the index showed a significant increase in fruit abundance during wet vs. dry months (ANOVA: df = 3, F = 17.7, P<0.0001; post hoc Tukey’s HSD: dry vs. wet 2013 P = 0.001, dry vs. wet 2014 P<0.0001) with no yearly differences between seasons and no differences between years (S1 Fig). This pattern largely reflects the abundance of Brosimum alicastrum; a species worth highlighting for its relevance in the diet of the study group [45,96] and high density in the study area [95]. The study group has been shown to consistently concentrate its long-term activities in a core area that contains a greater proportion of mature forest than the protected area as a whole (more than 50% vs. less than 25% [41]). Considering that B. alicastrum is ten times as abundant in the mature forest than in other successional stages, fruiting of this species during the wet season results in large and abundant patches within the area where the monkeys concentrate their activities [41]. Therefore, the change from dry to wet season is accompanied by a combination of increased fruit abundance and density of patches within the ranging area of the study group.

Since the decision to follow a subgroup each field day was not based on the membership of any particular individual, differences in individual spatial preferences produced uneven sample sizes across individuals. To reduce the resulting bias, we restricted our data set to adult individuals observed throughout the four seasons of the study in at least 10% of the total scans from each period. Consequently, all our analyses used data on 11 adult monkeys (four males and seven females; S1 Table) with the exception of the analysis of grouping patterns which included data for any of the adult individuals considered as part of the group each season. Our sample of 11 individuals represented 61% of adult group-members in 2013 and 50% in 2014. This number of focal individuals is comparable to other studies of similar length which analyzed individual ranging patterns in Ateles spp. in the same and other study sites (for example: 6 adults and subadults [89], 13 adults [97] and 11 independently moving individuals [49]). Seasonal ranging patterns were evaluated by individual core areas, which indicate the area where individuals concentrated their activities in parts of the habitat assumed to hold important resources for them [41,51,98,99]. Core areas were defined as the portion of the utilization distribution contained in the 60% probability contour, as calculated by the Local Convex Hull (LoCoH) method [100,101]. LoCoH is a non-parametric method for calculating utilization distributions based on the construction of polygons (hulls) around each observation point using n nearest neighbors. The union of these hulls renders areas containing different proportions of points that can be associated with probabilities of occurrence. We used the same definition of core area as Ramos-Fernandez et al. [41], who analyzed ranging patterns for the same group, also using subgroup scan data. From the area vs. probability curve for yearly subgroup utilization distributions, they found that a 60% probability best approximated a slope of 1 for all cases. This is indicative of the greatest difference between the empirical curve and the null expectation of random use with no activity clumping [102]. Seasonal core areas were generated for each individual using all scan locations where it was observed. All core areas were calculated using the R software platform (v. 3.1.2 [103]) and the adaptive mode version of T-LoCoH [101]. In this setting, the T-LoCoH adaptive mode parameter a, is an upper bound on the sum of distances from each point to neighbors progressively further from it, thereby resulting in variation in the number of neighbors n used in the construction of each hull (viz: points in dense clusters have a larger n than points that are more isolated from their neighbors). The a value was selected through a compromise between minimizing the number of separate patches conforming the utilization distributions and avoiding polygons from crossing natural barriers into areas known not to be used by the monkeys, such as the lake (S2 Fig). The same a value was used for all calculations of seasonal-individual core areas. In addition to individual core area size, we examined seasonal changes in the spatial coincidence of core areas by first quantifying the total area covered by the union of all individual core areas per season, and then identifying the number of overlapping core areas within each portion of this union. We also used two indices to quantify the general coincidence between individual core areas: a group spatial gregariousness index quantifying how clumped together were individual core areas with respect to the total extent covered by the union of all core areas, and the spatial gregariousness of each individual quantifying how much each core area coincided with the rest of the core areas. Both indices are adapted from the index used by José-Domínguez et al. [104] to quantify site fidelity, but instead of considering the overlap of core areas from different time periods, we used the overlap of core areas from different individuals. Group spatial gregariousness was defined by: gSGI=(Σi=2ji*Oi)/(K*A), where A is the total area covered by the core area union; j is the maximum number of overlapping individual core areas in a certain season (11 in all cases); i is the number of overlapping core areas with values between 2 and j; O is the size of the area where i core areas overlap within the core area union; and K is the total number of core areas analyzed per season (11 in all cases). Values of the group spatial gregariousness index range between 0 and 1 where 1 indicates total spatial overlap of all possible core areas and 0 indicates no coincidence at all (i.e. completely non-overlapping core areas). To calculate the individual spatial gregariousness for individual x, we used a very similar formulation where instead of A, the denominator includes the individual’s core area Ax, and the overlap Oi is restricted to areas of overlap within Ax, becoming Oix in the expression iSGIx=(Σi=2ji*Oix)/(K*Ax). Values of this index also range between 0 and 1 where 1 indicates total spatial overlap of the individual’s core area with all other possible core areas and 0 indicates no coincidence at all between that individual’s core area and any other (S3 Fig).

Grouping tendencies (analysis level 2): Grouping patterns were analyzed using average seasonal subgroup size (subgroup size) and the average subgroup size experienced by each individual (individual subgroup size). For calculating subgroup size, we included all subgroup scans where at least one of the adult monkeys of the group was in sight, and counts only included adult individuals. Therefore, subgroup size can have values higher than 11 since it considers all adults present at the time. Individual subgroup size was calculated for each individual, by including only scan points where it was in sight. In combination with the predicted decrease in core areas, both subgroup metrics were expected to increase in the food-abundant season if individuals were mostly driven by passive aggregation. Individual subgroup size was additionally used to detect potential differences in the effect of passive and active processes of association on individual gregariousness [74].

Pair-wise associations (analysis level 3): Our analyses of associations were based on two indices, each constructed from a different type of co-occurrence between pairs of individuals: spatial dyadic association index and dyadic association index. Both indices are based on the simple ratio dyadic association index [105,106] which describes the association between individuals A and B by: Association (A,B) =NAB/(NA+NB−NAB), where NAB corresponds to the number of co-occurrences of individuals A and B, while NA refers to all the occurrences of A and NB to all the occurrences of B. Given our sampling methodology, this index is also equivalent to the twice-weight association index [105]. The spatial dyadic association index examined the overlap between the core areas of pairs of individuals, capturing the extent to which they concentrated their activities in the same places during a certain season (spatial association), irrespectively of whether or not they were also observed in the same subgroup. Thus, a co-occurrence between individuals A and B (NAB in the association formula) corresponds to the size of the overlap of their core areas, while the occurrence of each individual NA and NB is the size of each of their individual core areas. Core area overlaps were computed using T-LoCoH. Values of the spatial association index reflect the overlap between core areas of two individuals as a proportion of the total area covered by both core areas. The dyadic association index describes spatio-temporal associations, where a co-occurrence of A with B refers to the presence of both individuals in the same subgroup (NAB in the association formula). This necessarily involves that they were together at the same time, and therefore captures the dyad’s tendency to occur in the same subgroup (dyadic association). Variables NA and NB correspond to all the observations of A or B in a subgroup. Average seasonal dyadic association index therefore increases if the number of associates of individuals and/or the intensity of their associations increase [64,107]. Changes in the size and location of the area used by individuals can modify the probability of random encounter with others. Variation in this random probability of encounter compared to variation in real encounter rates between pairs of individuals can indicate the influence of random processes of aggregation in patterns of association. To evaluate if any observed changes in core areas affected the probability of encounter, we ran a Monte Carlo simulation using T-LoCoH. For each season and pair of individuals, we assumed a random uniform distribution within each of their core areas. The simulation consisted of independent throws where we randomly added a point within the seasonal core area of each individual of the pair. Each pair of points added (one for each individual) was considered a throw. A trial was conformed of z number of throws corresponding to the smaller number of observations on the two members of a pair for a given season, because that was the maximum number of times they could have been observed together. For every throw, we measured the distance between the two points and if it was 30 meters or less, the pair was considered to be associated (spatio-temporal co-occurrence) in accordance with our field definition of subgroup (see above). If the distance was greater than 30m, the throw counted as an occurrence of one of the two individuals in absence of the other. We assigned these occurrences to one of the two individuals, alternating them each throw (because only one monkey could be observed at a time with our field methodology). We ran a thousand trials for each pair of individuals per season, averaging the total number of co-occurrences per trial to obtain the average random occurrence for each dyad. We used this value to calculate a random dyadic association index for each pair of individuals, in the same manner as the dyadic association index, but using the average number of random occurrences as the value for the co-occurrence NAB (in the association formula), while NA+NB corresponded to z. This random association measure is an approximation to the random probability of encounter between individuals, exclusively as a result of the relevance of core area overlap. If core areas decrease in areas commonly used by both members of a dyad, random associations are expected to increase. This random association index was then compared to the dyadic association index based on the observed encounter rates. However, because the random index was restricted to core areas, and the dyadic association index captures processes occurring beyond core areas, we calculated an equivalent of the dyadic association index that only considered occurrences of individuals within their respective core areas. By doing this, we eliminated possible random spatial effects operating outside core areas, potentially contained in the dyadic association index. Active processes of association can be identified by examining if certain individuals co-occurred more than a random expectation based on each individual’s tendency to associate in general [73]. While the Monte Carlo simulation allowed us to estimate the probability for two individuals to randomly find each other, this did not inform us if the associations observed were any different than expected if individuals chose group partners at random. Bejder et al. [108] devised a method where random sets of data are generated from the original, preserving the number of subgroups in which each individual was observed and the number of individuals in each subgroup. When a large number of random samples are generated, they may be used to distinguish non-random processes in the original data [74]. We ran permutation tests on the compiled version of SOCPROG 2.5 for each seasonal dataset, taking the coefficient of variation of the association index as our test statistic [73,109]. All tests were done using the dyadic association index corrected for gregariousness [110]. This correction accounts for individuals that might prefer certain group-sizes rather than particular companions and is represented by: DAIG(A,B)=(DAIAB)(ΣDAI/(ΣDAIAΣDAIB)), where DAIAB is the dyadic association index between individuals A and B, ΣDAI is the sum of the dyadic association index for all dyads observed in a season and ΣDAIA and ΣDAIB represent the sums of all the dyadic associations for individuals A and B, respectively [110]. As a result, the analysis indicated the occurrence of associations which were stronger (attractive) or weaker (repulsive) than the random expectation based on a predefined significance level (P < 0.05 for all tests). Additionally, the test identified non-random dyads, and this subset was used to assess association stability by examining the number of seasons in which each of these dyads was observed. We considered both consecutive and non-consecutive recurrences of non-random associations, because the first inform about the endurance of an association despite the effects of seasonal changes in the socio-spatial context, while non-consecutive associations could reveal driving factors for a particular association in a certain seasonal context. Altogether, this analysis provides criteria to determine the presence and persistence of active processes of association. A complementary source of insight about the factors influencing observed associations is the social context where they occur, which was not accounted for in previous analyses. We searched for changes in the correlation between the dyadic association index and the average subgroup size, as indicators of the type of association process occurring in each season. Newton-Fisher [67] used this correlation to discern between processes of passive and active association in a group. In the former, dyadic associations are expected to correlate positively with subgroup size, whereas in the latter, higher dyadic association values are expected among individuals that tend to be together in smaller subgroups and therefore the correlation between dyadic associations and subgroup size should be negative. Following methods by Newton-Fisher [67] and Wakefield [72], we examined this correlation by first converting each set of seasonal dyadic association values into a z-score so that they varied on the same relative scale, and facilitate comparison between seasons. We calculated the average subgroup-size for each dyad, and log normalized both variables (previously adding 1 to each dyadic association z-score to make all values positive). Finally, we calculated Kendall’s tau coefficient for each season. If smaller subgroups include individuals with stronger associations [67], differences in association strength should be most apparent in single-pair groups. If this were the case, 1) some dyads should occur in single-pairs relatively more than others and 2) there should be a higher probability of finding attractive associations among those dyads that associate most frequently in single-pairs. To test this assumption we used the results from the permutation tests for non-random associations and a dyadic association index restricted to pairs (pair index), to investigate if dyads with attractive associations were more prone to occur in pairs than others. We calculated the pair index in the same manner as the dyadic association index but taking a subset of the scan-data corresponding only to subgroups of two individuals. For the pair index, the co-occurrence value NAB involved both individuals being together in single-pair subgroups and was restricted to all instances where one individual (A) or the other (B) were in a subgroup of size two. We used Mann-Whitney U tests to compare pair index values among dyads with attractive associations against all other dyads. As a way to quantify association homogeneity and evaluate how it changed between seasons, we calculated the seasonal coefficient of variation (standard deviation relative to the mean) of the dyadic association index using dyadic association values for all dyads from each season [64]. Lower values indicate little difference between dyads in their associations, suggesting passive aggregation processes, while higher values are expected when there are different patterns of association within the group, indicating active processes. We complemented our analysis of associations with a quantitative exploration of changes in the seasonal association network for the 11 study subjects. We used SOCPROG 2.5 to construct weighted non-directional networks for each season. Nodes represented individuals and weighted links represented the dyadic association index corrected for gregariousness [110]. We used the seasonal change in average individual strength and clustering coefficient of each network to evaluate the stability of the associations through time, which can be indicative of long-term processes of active association [64]. The individual strength corresponds to the added weights of all links connected to a node. It is equivalent to the degree for networks with weights and is a measure of how connected a node is to the rest of the network [74,111]. An increase in the number of associations or their intensity will therefore result in increased individual strength. The clustering coefficient indicates how well the associates of an individual are connected among themselves [112]. The version of the coefficient implemented in SOCPROG 2.5 is based on the matrix definition for weighted networks by Holme et al. [113], where the clustering coefficient of individual i is given by: Cw(i)=(Σjkwijwjkwki)/(maxij(wij)Σjkwijwki), Where wij, wjk and wki are the values of the association indices between individual i and all its pairs of associated jk, while maxij(wij) is the maximum value of the association index of i with any individual j. As with the dyadic association index, this metric is expected to be higher if individuals increase the frequency of occurrence with their associates from the previous season (i.e. if they are more strongly connected), or if they increase the number of individuals with which they occur (i.e. if individuals are connected to an increased number of others).

Seasonal comparisons were done using Wilcoxon signed-rank tests unless specified otherwise. For other comparisons we used Mann-Whitney U and Kruskal-Wallis tests. P values for pair-wise differences after multiple comparisons were adjusted with the Bonferroni correction (Padj). When presented, bootstrap confidence intervals were obtained by resampling the corresponding original data 1000 times with replacement. A distribution of averages was then used to derive 95% confidence intervals using the first-order normal approximation as implemented in the boot package for R [114].

