All research procedures and protocols including participant recruitment materials were reviewed and approved by the University Committee on Activities Involving Human Subjects at New York University. Parents of participating subjects provided consent and all participating children and adolescents provided verbal assent.

The CSRP program was evaluated through a cluster-randomized design, and Head Start sites were recruited based on four criteria: 1) receipt of federal Head Start funding; 2) having two or more classrooms that offered full-day classes; 3) location in a set of high-poverty Chicago neighborhoods that contained high crime rates, low rates of mobility, and a substantial portion of families living below the poverty line; 4) completion of a screening self-nomination procedure [3]. The recruitment process led to 18 Head Start centers participating in the study, with centers grouped into pairs based on a set of 14 site-level characteristics. Within these pairs, which we subsequently refer to as “blocking groups,” sites were randomly assigned to either treatment or control, and treatment sites implemented the CSRP intervention program described above. Control sites continued “business-as-usual,” but classrooms in control sites were provided with part-time teaching aides to account for the changes in student-to-teacher ratio brought on by MHC’s in treatment sites. The program was implemented for two different cohorts of students and teachers, with Cohort 1 participating in 2004–2005 (57% of the sample) and Cohort 2 participating in 2005–2006. Two classrooms from each of the 18 Head Start sites were selected for study participation, and evaluators successfully recruited 83% of students from these classes to participate in data collection (student n = 602). During the school year, one classroom in the control condition lost Head Start funding due to budget cuts, which resulted in 35 total classrooms participating in the study. At the beginning of the preschool year (i.e., baseline), information regarding the child’s family and home environment was obtained via parent survey, and children’s cognitive, behavioral and emotional functioning were measured via direct assessment. Observers blind to treatment status also rated the quality of the classroom environment at baseline, and teachers responded to surveys that measured their professional and educational experiences, as well as their perceptions of their classroom and school environment. Teachers were also surveyed regarding the behavioral problems of each child participating in the study. In the spring, teachers again evaluated children’s behavioral problems, and study examiners again assessed children’s mathematics, literacy, attention and executive functioning via direct assessment (i.e., post-treatment outcomes). The participants of the study have been followed into adolescence, and the current study reports on data collected during the 2015–2016 school year, which occurred 11 years after the treatment year for Cohort 1 and 10 years after the treatment year for Cohort 2. By the 2015–2016 follow-up year, 466 adolescents remained in the study (236 in the treatment group and 230 in the control group), and this 23% rate of attrition did not statistically significantly differ between the groups (p = 0.51). At the time of the assessment, approximately 70% of participants were in high school, and 30% of the sample remained in middle school. This grade-level difference was largely due to the 2 cohort design of the study, though grade repetition and the substantial variation in student age at baseline (M = 4.1 years, SD = .65, range: 2.15–6.08) also contributed.

Recall that the CSRP program consisted of 4 key components: 1) professional development to improve teacher behavior management strategies in support of children's self-regulation; 2) MHC classroom visits to assist teachers in implementing the behavioral management program; 3) MHC’s provision of stress reduction workshops; 4) MHC services targeted at children identified as having especially severe emotional and behavioral issues. The intervention lasted 30 weeks, with MHC support occurring throughout the intervention. Full intervention details have been described in previous reports [3–5]. Here, we provide a brief overview of key program features. Teachers in the treatment group were provided with 5 professional development sessions staggered throughout the fall and winter months of school year, each lasting approximately 6 hours. These sessions were based on the Incredible Years Teacher Training Program [63], and teachers were given new strategies to help reduce children’s challenging behavioral problems and to support positive, self-regulated behavior. For example, teachers were provided with video exemplars of being on the lookout for the opportunity to reward and praise prosocial behaviors among children whom they viewed as behaviorally difficult or misbehaving. This strategy of “catching your student being good” was demonstrated to staff as a way to break a coercive cycle of dysregulation and negative teacher attention using concrete examples, simple steps and discussion. Sessions were led by licensed clinical social workers, and MHC’s also attended each session to help foster better relationships between MHC’s and study teachers.

The MHC’s were master’s level social workers who were required to have experience working with high-risk families in early childhood educational settings. MHC’s were recruited such that they had cultural match with teachers and children in the Head Start centers, and most spoke Spanish and English. In the fall and early winter months of the school year (i.e., the first third of the 30-week intervention), the MHC’s first served as coaches and aides to teachers in their efforts to implement the behavioral management program in the classroom, and MHC’s visited treatment classrooms to provide intervention coaching. During mid-winter of the school year (i.e., the second third of the 30-week intervention), MHCs held a stress reduction workshop for teachers at each site, and they also met one-on-one with teachers to discuss job-related stressors and provide strategies for mitigating burnout. Finally, during the last 10 weeks of the intervention, MHC’s worked directly with approximately 3 to 4 children per class who had been identified by teachers and MHC’s as needing individual attention for issues relating to behavioral and emotional dysregulation.

In Table 1, we present each follow-up measure collected next to the analogous outcome measure collected at the end of preschool. This table hilights the conceptual link between the original outcomes assessed and the outcomes considered in the current paper. Unfortunately, we were not able to collect as many measures for each construct as was originally collected at the end of preschool, but as with the end-of-preschool assessments, our follow-up indicators were also measured through both direct assessment and survey. We describe each follow-up measure collected during adolescence in detail below, and we provide information regarding the original end-of-preschool measures in the supplementary materials (S1 Appendix).

Table data removed from full text. Table identifier and caption: 10.1371/journal.pone.0200144.t001 List of measures used in end-of-preschool evaluations and the current paper. Note. The PSRA stands for the Preschool Self-Regulation Assessment [64], and all end-of-preschool measures are described at length in the original evaluation reports [4,5], and we provide a brief description in the supplementary material (S1 Appendix).

All follow-up measures were completed as part of a 60- to 90-minute computerized assessment battery programmed using Inquisit 4.0.8, a psychological measurement software capable of being tailored to execute various types of assessments [65]. The Inquisit software was programmed to include measures of executive function, emotional regulation, and behavioral problems into the battery. The battery was then presented on HP Stream 11.6-inch notebooks. Programming the battery into laptops allowed participants to be assessed across a range of accessible settings. The battery was administered to participants in the Chicago metropolitan area by trained assessors at school or at home, depending on participants’ and schools’ availability. Out-of-area participants were guided to install and complete the battery on their own computers by trained assessors over the phone or web conference. The Hearts and Flowers task (H&F; originally called the “Dots Task”) was used as the primary measure of adolescent executive function [66], as the assessment taps working memory, cognitive flexibility, and inhibitory control [67]. The task asks students to respond to stimuli presented on a screen, and as the task progresses, students are forced to juggle an increasingly difficult set of demands that place stress on their attention and inhibitory control [67]. The task has been used as an overall measure of executive function during adolescence [68], and it has been shown to be a valid measure of executive function as task performance correlates strongly with other measures of working memory and inhibitory control [69]. This measure was the first task in the computerized assessment battery, and children were instructed to respond to the presentation of stimuli on the screen by pressing a key (“Q” or “P”). Stimuli took the form of either hearts or flowers, and they appeared in succession on opposite sides of the screen. When presented with a heart, students were told to press on the same side as the stimulus (“Q” when displayed on the left, “P” when on the right), and when presented with a flower, they were instructed to press on the opposite side (“P” when displayed on the left, “Q” when on the right). Adolescents were given practice trials, and the task began with a series of 12 “hearts only” (congruent) trials, followed by 12 “flowers only” (incongruent) trials. In the final block, adolescents were presented with 33 “mixed trials” including both hearts and flowers stimuli, which substantially increased the difficulty of the task. In the current study, Hearts and Flowers stimuli were randomly presented on the right or left side for an equal number of trials in each block, and the task took approximately 2 minutes to complete. When interpreting student performance on the task, we focused on mixed block performance, as this has been shown to pose the greatest challenge through the cognitive demand of switching mindsets [69,70]. We used the proportion of correct responses (i.e., the number of trials with a correct response divided by the total number of trials) during mixed block as a measure of working memory, cognitive flexibility and inhibitory control. We also used mean reaction time on mixed trials minus mean reaction time on “hearts only” trials (i.e., the easiest trials) as a measure of the effect of increased cognitive demand on basic processing speed. These two measures are commonly derived from the H&F task, and the H&F task has been used in other early childhood intervention evaluations [66].

We used self-reported GPA as our primary measure of adolescent academic achievement. Students responded to the question “How would you describe your grades in school,” and they were given the following set of options: “mostly A’s,” “mostly B’s,” “mostly C’s,” “mostly D’s,” “mostly F’s,” “none of these grades,” and “not sure.” We coded “none of these grades” and “not sure” responses to missing, and set the remaining options to a 4-point GPA scale (e.g., “mostly A’s” was coded as “4” etc. ). Although we hoped to model outcomes on measures of GPA taken from district offices, administrative data were missing for most students. For the 172 students that had both self-reported GPA and district-reported GPA, these two measures of student grades had a 0.67 correlation. For the 172 students with both forms of data, we found no differences in reporting accuracy between the treatment and control group. We found that a minority of students (n = 19) reported “mostly F’s” or “mostly D’s” despite having administrative records showing grades closer to a “C” average. We then recoded these 19 outlier cases to a “C” average, which provided a small improvement to the correlation between self-reported GPA and district-reported GPA (r(172) = 0.68). Thus, our final measure of self-reported GPA was on a 2 to 4 scale, which essentially created a measure with “low,” “middle,” or “high” categories. In the supplementary material (S2 Appendix), we describe our analytic efforts to validate the self-reported measure with the administrative data available, and we describe models that tested whether our main GPA findings were sensitive to our decision to recode the 19 “mostly F’s” and “mostly D’s” cases to “mostly C’s” (results did not substantively differ based on this recoding choice).

Internalizing and externalizing behaviors were measured through student self-report on the Risks and Strengths Scale, an adapted version of the Children’s Health Risk Behavior Scale [71], which was administered as the third task in the computerized assessment battery. On the internalizing subscale, students responded “yes” or “no” to items asking whether they felt safe, felt bad or scared due to how a peer or adult was treating them, felt unhappy, sad, or depressed, felt worthless or inferior, or felt that they had been crying too much. Similarly, students responded either “yes” or “no” to items on the externalizing subscale, which asked whether or not students had been involved in a physical fight, had gone out with or kissed a boy or girl, had a strong temper, were impulsive, or tried to break or destroy something. Internalizing and externalizing outcome variables were calculated by averaging scores for the items within each subscale. Thus, scores on the measures represent the proportion of times a student indicated that they engaged in either externalizing or internalizing behaviors. Both subscales were reliable measures for our sample, with a Cronbach’s alpha of .74 for internalizing and .67 for externalizing.

Our measure of adolescent emotional regulation was the Emotional Go/No Go task (EGNG) [72]. Given the emotional changes and instability associated with adolescence [73], it was important to administer a measure that could tap into inhibitory control skills specifically in the face of emotional stimuli. The EGNG task has been validated alongside neuroimaging techniques to display associations between task performance and neurological activity known to play a role in emotional processing [74,75]. The measure is designed to illuminate whether children recognize emotionally expressive faces, and whether the presence of an emotionally expressive face distracts them from focusing on a cognitively challenging task. In the current study, EGNG was administered as the second task in the computerized assessment battery, and much like the Hearts and Flowers task, it contained trials in which adolescents were presented with stimuli and asked to press a button in response to a stimulus. Stimuli consisted of faces in the center of the screen displaying either happy, sad, angry, or neutral emotions. In each block, neutral faces and faces of one other emotional type were displayed. Before each block, instructions asked participants to respond by pressing the spacebar to either the emotional or neutral faces (“Go” trials), and to withhold responses to the other type of face (“No Go” trials). In addition to a practice block, the task consisted of 6 test blocks—3 Emotional (Happy, Angry or Sad) “Go” versus Neutral “No Go” blocks, and 3 Neutral “Go” versus Emotional “No Go” blocks. Block order was randomized. Each block contained 21 (70%) “Go” response trials and 9 (30%) “No Go” no-response trials. The 70% to 30% Go/No Go trial ratio was implemented to prime participants to respond, making it more difficult for participants to inhibit responding, thus assessing their ability to regulate in response to emotional versus neutral stimuli. Each trial consisted of a 500ms pre-trial pause followed by a 1 second response window, during which the stimulus was presented for 500ms before a 500ms blank screen. The task contained a total of 180 test trials, taking about 6 minutes to complete. Our analyses focused on measures of performance taken from the four blocks in which participants viewed “Angry vs. Neutral” and “Sad vs. Neutral” faces. The data for this task were organized along three dimensions: hit rate, false alarm rate, and reaction time. Hit rate was the proportion of “Emotion Go” trials answered correctly. For example, “Angry Hit Rate” would be the proportion of trials correctly answered during the “Emotion Go- Angry vs. Neutral” block. False alarm rate was the proportion of “Emotion No Go” trials answered incorrectly (e.g., “Angry False Alarm Rate” would measure the proportion of times a participant responded to angry faces when instructed to respond to neutral faces). Reaction time was a measure of processing speed to emotional stimuli, and it was calculated as the average reaction time on correct hits during “Emotion Go” trials. These three dimensions have been leveraged to understand the role of emotional response inhibition in other low-income samples of children [76]. For “Angry” and “Sad” trials, we then calculated two measures of performance for our treatment impact analyses. The first was D-prime, which has been treated as the primary measure of emotion regulation in previous analyses of EGNG [72], and it was calculated as the standardized difference between emotion-specific hit rate and false alarm rate (e.g., “Angry D-Prime” was calculated as the difference between “Angry Hit Rate” (standardized) and “Angry False Alarm Rate” (standardized)). Finally, as with Hearts and Flowers, we calculated respective measures of adjusted reaction time, which were calculated as reaction time during “Emotion Go” trials for either angry or sad faces minus reaction time during happy “Emotion Go” trials.

In the supporting information (S3 Appendix), we present a complete list of all baseline measures included in our treatment impact analyses. These characteristics, all assessed in the fall of the Head Start year, have been described at length in previous reports [4,5]. Here, we present a brief overview of each measure. Child-level demographic characteristics used in the analysis were collected from parents, Head Start site directors, and children themselves, and these characteristics included gender, age at preschool entry, and child ethnicity (White, African American, Hispanic, multiracial, or other).

Upon signing the CSRP consent form for his or her child, the parent or guardian completed a demographic interview. Family and parent characteristics used in the analyses included covariates related to family size, government assistance/support, immigrant status, parent employment, education, marital or partnership status, if the parent was African American or Hispanic, and the biological parent’s contact with the child. Income was represented via an income to needs ratio, calculated as the total family income from the previous year divided by that same year’s federal poverty threshold.

Child baseline skills and behavior: Children’s self-regulatory skills and pre-academic skills were collected individually by a group of master’s level assessors who were blind to the treatment status of the children. Measures of executive function and effortful control were collected using the Preschool Self-Regulation Assessment (PSRA) [64], which involved direct assessment of children’s performance levels or latencies on lab-based tasks that were adapted for field administration using paper, pencils, digital timers, and other materials. Executive function was measured with the Balance Beam task [77] and Pencil Tap [78]. Effortful control skills were measured using four delay tasks: Toy Wrap, Toy Wait, Snack Delay, and Tongue Task [77]. Children’s performance across the executive function tasks and the effortful control tasks were standardized and then averaged into two composites. The 28-item PSRA Assessor Report captured global dimensions of children’s impulsivity, attention, and emotions. Two factors representing Attention/Impulse Control and Positive Emotion emerged from the full report, with the Attention/Impulse Control subscale reliably representing children’s self-regulation (internal consistency of α = 0.92). Children’s vocabulary skills were assessed using the 24-item Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT) [79,80] if they spoke English, and the Test de Vocabulario en Imagenes Peabody (TVIP) [81] if they were Spanish-proficient or bilingual. Children’s pre-academic skills were measured via an assessment developed for Head Start that included tests of both letter naming and early math ability [82]. With the letter-naming task, letters of the alphabet were arranged in approximate order of item difficulty, and children were asked to name each letter presented. The early math skills portion of the assessment contained 19 items that covered children’s mastery of counting and basic operations [82]. Children’s behavior problems were rated in the fall by teachers and teaching assistants using the Behavior Problems Index (BPI) [83], a 28-item scale modified for use by teachers. Items were summed into internalizing (α = 0.80) and externalizing (α = 0.92) subscales, and children’s scores were averaged across the child’s teacher and TA. Parents also reported their children’s behavior using the BPI, and ratings of internalizing and externalizing problems from both teachers and parents are included in this analysis.

Head Start teacher characteristics were assessed through teacher report and observer ratings in the fall. Teachers reported on their age, level of education, and on several psychosocial characteristics that may influence their perception of their students’ behavioral difficulty. Teachers completed the 6-item K6, a scale of psychological distress [84], the 6-item Job Demands, and the 5-item Job Control subscales of the Child Care and Early Education Job Inventory [85]. These variables were averaged across all teachers in the classroom. Classroom quality was collected with observational measures in the fall using four subscales of the Classroom Assessment Scoring System (CLASS) [86] and the Early Childhood Environment Rating Scale–Revised (ECERS-R) [87]. The CLASS was used to measure teacher sensitivity, positive climate, negative climate, and behavior management. Finally, class size and number of adults in the class were also added as covariates.

We hypothesized that the CSRP intervention would have impacts on our measures of executive function, academic achievement, behavioral problems, and emotional regulation. To test our hypotheses, we began by regressing each dependent variable on treatment status and a series of blocking group fixed effects: Outcomeij=a1+β1Txij+∑j=19πBlockj+eij1 where Outcomeij represents a respective measure of adolescent executive functioning, academic achievement, behavioral problems, or emotional functioning for the ith child in blocking group j and Txij represents the treatment status dummy indicator (coded “1” for treatment and “0” for control). We included a series of blocking group fixed effects to account for the cluster-randomized design of the study, and including the series of blocking groups also controls for cohort status, as each block was either in cohort 1 or cohort 2. In this equation, β1 represents the treatment impact, which will be unbiased only if the error term, eij, is uncorrelated with treatment assignment. In other words, our treatment effect estimate would only be unbiased if random assignment produced groups completely balanced on observable and unobservable characteristics. Because we found evidence of differences between the treatment and control group at baseline (see further description below), we rely on regression models that include covariates for the host of characteristics assessed during the fall of the Head Start year: Outcomeij=a1+β1Txij+∑j=19πBlockj+χChildij+λFamilyij+ΩTeacherij+eij2 where Outcomeij and Txij are defined as before, but Childij, Familyij, and Teacherij represent sets of controls for child, family, and teacher characteristics all assessed at baseline (see S4 Appendix for complete list). For Eq 2, β1 will capture the unbiased treatment effect if the baseline control variables account for all observed and unobserved baseline differences between the treatment and control groups. The estimates generated by Eq 2represent our preferred estimates, as these estimates take into account the cluster-design of the study by controlling for blocking group, and they also represent the best attempt to adjust for differences present at baseline by including covariates. With this regression model, we include the full set of baseline covariates in order to generate the most precise estimates possible and to control for any unmeasured source of confounding that could be correlated with measured observables [88,89]. Further, we adjusted standard errors for site-level clustering using the Huber-White adjustment in Stata 15.0, and we used multiple imputation to account for all missing data on baseline covariates. For multiple imputation, we generated 25 multiply imputed datasets using the multivariate normal regression procedure in Stata 15.0 [90]. We also present results from supplementary analyses described below, including estimates that were generated by regression models that adjusted for study attrition, and we provide a host of sensitivity checks in the supplementary information files to ensure that results were not generated due to idiosyncratic features of the statistical models we chose to adopt.

An anonymized version of the dataset used for the current paper has been made available at datadryad.org (INSERT FINAL WEBSITE URL HERE). The data have been posted along with two additional files: 1) a “readme” explaining the variables contained within the dataset; 2) a file containing the Stata 15.0 syntax that was used to generate the results tables shown in the main text and supplementary material.

