2. Sixteen subjects (6 men, mean age: 24.7 ± 2.5 years) participated in study 1 (comparison of imaging paradigms). Notably, one subject had to be excluded from study 1 because of uncomfortableness in the scanner, yielding 15 remaining subjects. In study 2 (assessment of test-retest reliability), 20 subjects (10 men, mean age: 25.0 ± 2.2 years) participated. To investigate the test-retest reliability of the imaging paradigms, all subjects in study 2 underwent the identical experiment twice in two separate sessions. The time interval between sessions ranged from 5 to 8 days (mean time interval: 6.9 ± 0.2 days). All 36 subjects were right-handed, had completed the equivalent of a high school degree (“Gymnasium”) and were native German speakers. None had any history of medical, neurological or psychiatric illnesses or brain pathology. All subjects had normal or corrected to normal vision. Each gave informed written consent prior to participation. The study conformed with the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the local ethics committee of the Medical Faculty of the University of Marburg.

In study 1, subjects performed three different tasks, which are well established for testing hemispheric lateralization during spatial processing (see below for a detailed description of each task): “dots-in-space” task, adapted from [21], mental rotation task [24], and Landmark task [11]. The order of these tasks was pseudorandomized and counterbalanced across subjects. The aim of study 1 was to identify which of these paradigms evoked robust right-hemispheric lateralization both at the group and single-subject level. In study 2, we then evaluated the test-retest reliability for the most robust paradigm (as quantified by our pre-defined criteria of robustness described below). All paradigms were implemented and displayed using the Presentation® Software package (Version 14.1, http://neurobs.com). Prior to the experiment, subjects practiced each task outside the MR-scanner to ensure that they had understood the instructions. During the fMRI measurements, responses were reported by pushing a button on an MR-compatible response box, which was located on the left and right thigh. “Dots-in-space” task: The “dots-in-space” task used in the present study was based on a spatial memory task originally developed for fTCD [21]. Subjects had to memorize the location of a number of red dots randomly interspersed with a larger number of white dots, presented on a black background (Fig 1). The dots were randomly distributed across the screen and not aligned in rows or columns to prevent verbal encoding strategies. The task was divided into two parts: an encoding phase and a retrieval phase. Subjects were shown 20 different arrangements of white and red dots (“target stimuli”). Each target stimulus was shown three times in a pseudorandomized order. Ten of the target stimuli consisted of 17 white and 9 red dots (“difficult condition”), whereas the remaining target stimuli consisted of 23 white and 3 red dots (“easy condition”). During the encoding phase, each stimulus was presented for 5 s and then followed by a blank screen with an inter-stimulus interval (ISI) of 1 s. Subjects were instructed to memorize the location of the red dots.

Figure data removed from full text. Figure identifier and caption: 10.1371/journal.pone.0186344.g001 fMRI-Stimuli.a) “Dots-in-space” task: Activation (left, middle) and control-condition (right) of the “dots-in-space” task. In the activation condition subjects were asked whether they have seen the same arrangement of red dots during the encoding part. In the control condition, they were asked to decide whether there was a red dot or not. b) Mental rotation task: Activation (left) and control-condition (right) of the mental rotation task. In the activation condition subjects were asked to indicate, whether the figure on the right, showed the figure on the left from behind, the bottom, the top, the left, or the right by pressing the respective finger of their right hand. In the control condition, they were asked to decide whether the two figures were identical or not. All stimuli were taken from Stumpf and Fay (1983), scanned in and corrected for contrast and brightness differences. c) Landmark task: Activation (left) and control-condition of version A (middle) and version B and C (right) of the Landmark task. During the activation condition, subjects were asked to decide whether the horizontal line was transected left or right from the middle (version A) or whether the line was bisected correctly (version B and C). The horizontal line, which measured 200 pixels (13.48 cm), appeared 0.6 s in one of the four corners of the screen. In versions A and B, the vertical line was centered either exactly in the middle of the horizontal line or slightly deviated to the left or the right. Distances of 15, 30 and 45 pixels (resulting in 1.01, 2.02, and 3.03 cm lengths and visual angles of 0.241°, 0.482° and 0.723° respectively) were used to shift the vertical line to either side. Version C was characterized by smaller distance variations. Distances to the middle of the horizontal line were 12, 25 and 37 pixels, resulting in 0.809, 1,685 and 2.493 cm and visual angles of 0.193°, 0.402° and 0.505° respectively. In the control condition of version A (middle) subjects were asked to decide, whether a transecting line was present, whereas in the control condition of version B and C, subjects had to decide whether the vertical line transected the horizontal one or not (right figure). Answers were indicated with the index- and middle finger of the right hand (version A) or of both hands (version B and C).

Functional images were acquired only during the retrieval phase, which consisted of 18 blocks (Fig 2A). Six blocks belonged to the difficult condition, six blocks to the easy condition (i.e., test conditions), and six blocks to a control condition (see below). Again, the order of conditions was pseudorandomized. Each block started with a black screen (3 s) followed by an instruction screen that indicated the task condition of the upcoming trial (5 s). After the instructions, six stimuli (“test stimuli”) were presented. Each test stimulus was shown for 2 s followed by a jittered ISI (average length 1 s; range: 0.6 s to 1.4 s) and a black screen after the sixth stimulus (5 s). This resulted in a total block length of 30 s. During the retrieval phase, subjects were asked to decide whether the presented test stimulus was familiar or not. Subjects responded by pressing a button with the index finger (yes) or middle finger (no) of their right hand on the MR-compatible response box. During the control condition, subjects were instructed to decide whether a stimulus contained exactly one red circle or not. Stimuli in this condition consisted of either only white dots or white dots and exactly one red dot randomly located on the black background (Fig 1A). The total length of the paradigm was 9 minutes 10 seconds.

Figure data removed from full text. Figure identifier and caption: 10.1371/journal.pone.0186344.g002 Schematic representation of the experimental procedure.a) “Dots-in-space” task: Each experimental trial began with an introduction screen (5 s) indicating the following condition (easy, hard, control). Participants were asked, whether they have seen the same arrangement of dots during the encoding part or not (easy, hard), or whether the arrangement contained a red dot (control) by pressing a button with the index- or middle finger of their right hand, respectively. The paradigm consisted of three blocks of each condition, with six stimuli within each block. b) Mental rotation task: Each experimental trial began with an introduction screen (5 s) indicating the following condition (test, control). Participants were asked, to decide whether the picture on the right side showed the identical cube on the left side seen from the left, right, back, top or bottom. Answers were indicated by pressing either their right thumb (from the left), index finger (from the bottom), middle finger (from the top), ring finger (from the back) or the little finger (from the right). During the control condition (low spatial load), either pairs of identical cubes shown from the same perspective or two different cubes were presented. Subjects had to decide whether the presented cubes were the same or not. Subjects gave their answer by pressing a button with the index finger (same) or middle finger (different) of their right hand on a MR-compatible response box. The paradigm consisted of 10 control and 10 activation blocks that appeared in pseudorandomized order. In each block 4 stimuli were shown. Each stimulus was presented for 5 s. c) Landmark task: The paradigm began with a fixation screen (10 s) prior the experimental conditions. Participants were instructed to fixate the cross during the whole experiment. Each experimental trial began with an introduction screen (1.5 s) indicating the following condition (test, control). In version A participants were asked, whether the horizontal line, appearing in one of the four corners of the screen, was intersected left or right from the middle point (test) or whether a transection mark was present or not (control). Answers were indicated by pressing a respective button with their right hand. In version B and C participants were asked to decide whether the horizontal line was bisected correctly or not. In the control condition, they were asked to indicate, whether the horizontal line was transected by the vertical one or not. Answers were indicated by pressing the respective button with both hands, simultaneously.

Mental rotation task: The mental rotation task used in the present study was based on a spatial orientation task that had also been originally introduced for fTCD [24,25]. Subjects were presented with pairs of three-dimensional images of transparent cubes with 1, 2 or 3 cables inside showing the same object from two different perspectives (Fig 1B). During the activation condition (high spatial processing load), subjects were presented with pairs of identical cubes, however, the right-sided cube was always seen from different perspectives. Subjects were asked to decide whether the right-sided cube showed the left-sided cube seen from the left, right, back, top or bottom. According to the perspective in which the right cube was presented, answers were indicated by pressing either the right thumb (perspective: left), index finger (bottom), middle finger (top), ring finger (back) or the little finger (right). During the control condition (low spatial processing load), either pairs of identical cubes shown from the same perspective or two different cubes were presented. Subjects had to decide whether the presented cubes were identical or not. Subjects responded by pressing a button with the index finger (same) or middle finger (different) of their right hand. The paradigm consisted of 10 control and 10 activation blocks that were presented in a pseudorandomized order (Fig 2B). In each block, 4 stimuli were shown for 5 s each. Before each block, an instruction screen informed the subjects about the condition of the upcoming block (5 s). Each block was followed by a baseline period of 20 s, resulting in a total block length of 45 s. The total length of the paradigm was 15 minutes. Landmark task: The Landmark task has been used frequently to study spatial attention by means of functional imaging [11,14,29,30]. The paradigm consisted of two conditions. In the activation condition (high spatial processing load), subjects had to decide whether a horizontal line was correctly bisected by a crossing vertical line or not. In the control condition (low spatial processing load), subjects had to decide whether a horizontal line contained a transection mark (irrespective of the position of that mark) or not (Fig 1C). Eight activation and eight control blocks were presented in an alternating order. Each block lasted 20 s and contained 11 stimuli that were presented for 0.6 s followed by an ISI of 0.9 s. Stimuli were presented in the four corners of the screen while subjects had to fixate the center of the screen. This prevented subjects from solving the task by simply attending a single point as the center of all lines without the need to engage in spatial processing. Each block was preceded by an instruction screen displayed for 1.5 s, informing subjects about the condition of the upcoming block. The total length of the paradigm was 5 minutes 34 seconds. We used three different versions of the Landmark task (version A in study 1, version B and C in study 2). We slightly adapted the task in study 2 for the following two reasons: First, although the Landmark task was the most robust paradigm in study 1 according to our criteria (see below), the BOLD signal difference between activation and control condition was relatively small, as expressed, e.g., by low t-values. One reason for this might have been that the activation task was too simple, as indicated by the behavioral results. We therefore made the task more difficult in version C by using more demanding visual stimuli in the activation condition (Fig 1C). Second, we adapted both the control stimuli and the instructions (see below) to make our version of the Landmark task more similar to those used in recent work (e.g., [16,31]). Additionally, consistent with previous studies [11,27], proper fixation of the subjects was explicitly controlled in versions B and C by online visual inspection of the recorded traces of the direction of eye gaze using an MRI-compatible infrared-sensitive camera (EyeLink 1000, SR Research, Osgoode, ON, Canada). Specifically, a qualitative screening of the eye-tracking data was performed to identify subjects that poorly fixated the central cross during the experiment (e.g., performing saccades to the presented stimulus) and should thus be excluded. Importantly, no such cases were observed and thus all subjects were included in the subsequent analyses. Note that eye-tracking data in the present study did not enter any further analysis. In version A, we used horizontal lines with or without a transection mark as control stimuli (Fig 1C left and middle) and subjects had to decide whether the transection mark was present or not (irrespective of the position of that mark). In the activation condition, subjects had to decide whether the horizontal line was transected left or right from the middle or whether the vertical line crossed the horizontal line on the left or right side. For both conditions, subjects reported their decision with either their right index (“right side” or “transection mark is present”) or middle finger (“left side” or “no transection mark”). In versions B and C, all stimuli contained a vertical line. In the control condition, the vertical line crossed the horizontal line in half of the images, whereas the vertical line was above or beneath the horizontal line for the other half (Fig 1C right). Subjects had to decide whether the vertical line crossed the horizontal line or not. In the activation condition, subjects had to decide whether the horizontal line was correctly bisected or not. For both conditions, subjects reported their decision using both hands. Specifically, they indicated their answer by pressing both index (“correctly bisected” or “vertical line transects”) or middle fingers (“not correctly bisected” or “vertical line does not transect”) simultaneously.

Subjects were scanned on a 3-Tesla TIM-Trio MR Scanner (Siemens Medical Systems) with a 12-channel head matrix receive coil at the Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Marburg. Functional images were acquired using a T2*-weighted echo planar imaging (EPI) sequence sensitive to the Blood Oxygen Level Dependent (BOLD) contrast. Slices covered the whole brain and were positioned transaxially parallel to the anterior-posterior commissural line (AC-PC). In study 1, the following parameters were used: matrix size 64×64 voxels, FoV = 210 mm, 30 slices (ascending), slice thickness 4.5 mm (10% gap), TR = 1600 ms, TE = 30 ms, flip angle 90°. For the “dots-in-space” task (study 1), we used slightly different parameters (FoV = 192 mm, 35 slices (ascending), slice thickness 4 mm (10% gap), TR = 2150 ms). In total, 208 functional images were collected during the “dots-in-space” task, 215 scans for the Landmark task (version A) and 569 images for the mental rotation task. The initial images were excluded from further analyses in order to remove the influence of T1 stabilization effects. In study 2, we aimed to optimize the acquisition sequence for the Landmark task (version B and C) in order to boost the relatively low t-statistics observed in study 1. Specifically, we used a sequence that had previously been shown to provide high BOLD sensitivity and–more importantly for the goal of study 2 –excellent test-retest reliability of BOLD activation for a face perception paradigm [17]. The following scanning parameters were used: matrix size 64×64 voxels, FoV = 192 mm, 30 slices (descending), slice thickness 4 mm (15% gap), TR = 1450 ms, TE = 25 ms, flip angle 90°. In total, 222 functional images were collected for each subject.

All fMRI data were analyzed using the standard routines and templates from the software package SPM8 (v4290; www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm) in MATLAB 7.7.0.471 (R2008b) (The MathWorks, Inc.). Functional images were realigned, normalized (using the standard SPM EPI-Template), resampled to a voxel size of 2×2×2 mm3, smoothed with a 5-mm isotropic Gaussian kernel, and high-pass filtered (cut-off period 128 s). After pre-processing, statistical analysis was performed in a two-stage, mixed-effects procedure. At the single-subject level, BOLD responses were modelled in a General Linear Model (GLM) using boxcar functions convolved with the canonical hemodynamic response function from SPM8 [32,33]. For the “dots-in-space” task, we modelled four conditions (i.e., control, easy, hard, and baseline; instructions were not modelled). For the mental rotation task, we modelled three conditions (i.e., high spatial processing load, low spatial processing load, and fixation baseline; instructions were not modelled). For the Landmark task, we modelled two conditions (i.e., activation and control; instructions were not modelled). Additionally, the six realignment parameters were included as nuisance regressors in each design matrix to control for movement-related artifacts. For each paradigm and subject, contrast images were computed by contrasting activation and control conditions. More specifically, the following linear contrasts were calculated for each subject: “dots-in-space” task: “easy + hard > 2*control”; mental rotation task: “high spatial processing load > low spatial processing load”; Landmark task: “activation > control”. At the group level, individual contrast images for each paradigm were entered into separate one-sample t-tests. The anatomical localization of activated brain regions was assessed both by the SPM anatomy toolbox [34] and the WFU-Pickatlas [35]. 2.4.1 Study 1: Comparison of imaging paradigms: In study 1, we tested whether the three visuospatial processing paradigms were able to robustly determine right-hemispheric dominance not only at the group level, but also at the individual-subject level. Here, we defined four (subjective) criteria for characterizing robustness of right-hemispheric activation. These criteria assessed whether the paradigm activated a right-lateralized network both at the group level in a typical subject population (criterion a and b) and in a certain number of subjects at the single-subject level (criterion c and d): aAt the group level, the paradigm had to induce brain activity in a fronto-parietal network typically associated with spatial processing [11,30] at a significance level p < 0.001, cluster threshold k = 20.bAt the group level, the paradigm had to evoke right-hemispheric lateralization of brain activity, as indicated by a lateralization index LI < -0.4 [36], in core regions of the above-mentioned network (i.e., in frontal or parietal regions-of-interest (ROIs)).cAt the single-subject level, the paradigm had to induce brain activity in the right-hemispheric frontal and parietal ROIs at the significance level p < 0.001 uncorrected, cluster threshold k = 20, in more than 30% of all subjects.dAt the single-subject level, at least 30% of the subjects had to show right-hemispheric lateralization of the brain activation pattern (LI < -0.4) in both the frontal and parietal ROI.According to our previous experience with functional imaging tasks assessing spatial processing (e.g.,[29,30,37]) we expected that the strength of activity (in terms of t-values) would be rather low at the individual subject level. We therefore opted at this point for a liberal whole-brain threshold for the single-subject analyses (i.e., 30%) to not exclude paradigms that might provide reliable but weak (in terms of t-values) measures of hemispheric dominance in some subjects. Analysis 1: Brain activation at the group level: Brain activation patterns for each paradigm were first analyzed at the group level. One-sample t-tests were calculated separately for each paradigm, based on the contrast images from the single-subject analysis. ROI masks definition: ROI masks were defined using an approach based on Jansen et al. 2006 [38]. As visuospatial processing is subserved by a large neurocognitive network, with different regions within this network showing different extents of lateralization, the LI is unlikely to reveal a consistent pattern of lateralization across these key regions of the brain. Therefore, constructing precise ROIs that capture the brain activity is of great importance. For this, two approaches, with their own advantages and disadvantages, are commonly used: ROIs can be defined either functionally, based on the pattern of activation, or anatomically, based on anatomic knowledge. Obvious disadvantages of the latter are that pure anatomical definitions might include areas that are not engaged by the task or, vice versa, might exclude activation of interest that lies outside the chosen ROI (e.g., due to inaccuracies in the normalization procedure). Additionally, macroscopic landmarks are rarely reliable indicators of cytoarchitectonic borders [39]. On the other hand, functionally defined ROIs are also subject to limitations as they are typically derived from data of a pilot study investigating the functional activation in another group of subjects or within the same cohort with similar paradigms [40,41]. Consequently, they might include regions outside the actual area of interest–thus, often necessitating additional masking. To accommodate for the respective weaknesses of anatomically and functionally defined ROIs, we here applied a combined approach, which is based on both anatomical and functional constraints, for the definition of frontal and parietal ROIs as described in Adcock et al. (2003) [40] and Jansen et al. For the frontal ROI, group level activation patterns were thresholded as follows: “dots-in-space” and mental rotation task with p < 0.001 uncorrected, k = 50; Landmark task version A, B and C with p < 0.01 uncorrected, k = 50 (version A) and k = 20 (Version B and C), reflecting the functional constraint. We then applied anatomical constraints based on prior anatomical knowledge. Specifically, we used the frontal lobe mask as given by the WFU-Pickatlas as an inclusive mask to differentiate between regions of interest and regions of no interest. For each paradigm, we then created the frontal mask as a combination of the activated voxels surviving the defined thresholds within the anatomical landmarks.” For the parietal ROI, the same procedure as for the frontal ROI was used. For each paradigm, parietal ROIs were defined by creating masks of the group level activation pattern (“dots-in-space” and mental rotation task with p < 0.001 uncorrected, k = 50; Landmark task version A with p < 0.001, k = 100; Landmark task version B and C with p < 0.01, k = 20) within the anatomical constraints of the parietal lobe as given by the WFU-Pickatlas. The specific thresholds were chosen to ensure that masks were roughly similar in size for the different paradigms. Note that, in study 2, the conjunction of the group level activation patterns of session 1 and 2 was used to define frontal and parietal ROIs (Fig 3). In total, we created 10 masks–that is, a frontal and a parietal one for each paradigm.

Figure data removed from full text. Figure identifier and caption: 10.1371/journal.pone.0186344.g003 Landmark task ROIs.Frontal (red) and parietal (green) ROIs are shown for Landmark task version B (a) and C (b). Frontal and parietal ROIs were defined by creating a mask, resembling the conjunction of the group level activation patterns of session 1 and 2 within the frontal lobe and parietal lobe, respectively, as given by the WFU-Pickatlas (p < 0.01 uncorrected, k = 20). RH = right hemisphere, LH = left hemisphere.

The degree of hemispheric lateralization was quantified by the lateralization index (LI), which is given by the formula LI=AL−ARAL+AR, where AL and AR refer to measures of fMRI-activity for equal ROIs within the left (L) and right (R) hemisphere, respectively. Several approaches have been established to calculate the LI (for a discussion, see [14]). We here applied the bootstrapping approach implemented in the SPM8 LI-toolbox, which is the current gold standard [36]. The bootstrap approach uses 20 thresholding intervals with equally sized steps from 0 to the maximum t-value in the investigated region. At each threshold 100 bootstrap, resamples with a resample ratio of k = 0.25 were generated for each side from all the voxels in the investigated ROIs. From these resamples, all 10,000 possible LI combinations were calculated. A trimmed mean is then computed by only considering the central 50% of data points to exclude statistical or artefactual outliers and, thus, enhance the stability of the estimate. In a last step, a weighted mean LI is calculated by weighting the LIs with the respective thresholds, with higher thresholds receiving higher weights. The LI values range from −1 to +1. Positive values indicate a left-hemispheric dominance and negative values indicate a right-hemispheric dominance. We masked out the midline (+/- 5 mm) to avoid flow artifacts in the large draining veins, as proposed by Wilke and Schmithorst [36]. LIs for the group level BOLD patterns were calculated from the activation in the defined frontal and parietal masks for each paradigm. Analysis 2: Brain activation in single subjects: The ROIs resulting from each paradigm’s group analysis were used to investigate the activation strength in individual subjects. Therefore, single-subject activation maps were screened for activation in the respective ROIs at a fixed significance threshold (p < 0.001 uncorrected, cluster threshold k = 20). Individual LIs were also calculated in these ROIs, resulting in two indices (one frontal and one parietal LI) per subject for each paradigm.

2.4.2 Study 2: Test-retest reliability: In study 2, we assessed the test-retest reliability of both the activation patterns and the lateralization of the spatial processing network. Notably, we restricted our analyses to the Landmark task since this was the only task that fulfilled all criteria of robustness described above (see Results). First, we quantified the reliability of the activation patterns by computing intra-class correlation coefficients (ICCs) for each voxel using the ICC toolbox extension within SPM [42]. We then assessed the reliability of the brain lateralization of the spatial attention network. As a measure of the test-retest reliability of the degree of lateralization, we computed an ICC (two-way mixed model with absolute agreement using SPSS; IBM SPSS Statistics for Macintosh, version 22.0) for the LIs in the frontal and parietal ROI, respectively. As a measure of the test-retest reliability of hemispheric dominance (i.e., left, right), we determined the percentage of subjects in which categorical decision on the dominant hemisphere was consistent across measurements. Since the exact thresholds for partitioning left-dominance, right-dominance and bilateral activation are somewhat arbitrary, we repeated our analyses for three different specifications to account for this issue: (i)Three categories; left dominance for LI>0.4, right dominance for LI < -0.4, bilateral activation for |LI| ≤ 0.4(ii)Three categories; left dominance for LI > 0.2, right dominance for LI < -0.2, bilateral activation for |LI| ≤ 0.2(iii)Two categories; left dominance for LI > 0, right dominance for LI ≤ 0