The following study procedures and documents have been reviewed and approved by the institutional review boards at Columbia University and the New York Academy of Medicine. All participants provided written informed consent to participate in this study. The data for this analysis were collected as part of Social Ties Associated with Risk of Transition into injection drug use (START), a longitudinal study, which aimed to identify social risk factors for initiating injection drug use among young adult non-injection and newly initiated injection drug users (heroin, crack, and cocaine) in New York City. The methods of this study have been reported previously [41]. In brief, NIDUs and IDUs were recruited concurrently through targeted street outreach and RDS between July 2006 and June 2009. Non-injection drug users (NIDUs) were interviewed every 6 months for 18 months and newly initiated injection drug users (IDUs) completed a cross-sectional survey.

As previously described, economically disadvantaged and racially diverse New York City communities with high rates of HIV infection and overdose mortality were ethnographically mapped and targeted [41]. Forty-six RDS seeds and all targeted street outreach participants were recruited concurrently using random street intercept sampling in these neighborhoods. Outreach recruitment followed a targeted sampling plan, which was developed for HIV prevention studies and has been used to recruit a convenience sample of those at increased risk for HIV [44], [45]. RDS participants received 3 coupons to recruit drug-using peers to participate in the study and both modes of recruitment were administratively ended in June 2009. Forty-six RDS seeds (28 of whom recruited eligible peers) and a maximum of 14 recruitment waves produced 357 peer-recruits. Two seeds, each extending ≥13 waves recruited over half the peer-recruits (n = 203). Five seeds (extending ≥6 waves each) recruited 255 individuals and 311 individuals were recruited by 10 seeds with recruitment waves extending ≥4 waves. 18 seeds did not recruit any eligible peers [41]. In total, 403 participants were recruited through RDS and 217 were recruited through targeted street outreach [41].

Eligible START participants were 18–40 years of age (verified with a photo ID) and active drug users. Eligible IDUs (N = 130) reported injecting heroin, crack or cocaine for 4 years or less and injecting at least once in the past 6 months. NIDUs (N = 490) reported non-injection use of heroin, crack or cocaine for at least one year and used heroin, crack or cocaine 2–3 times per week in the last three months (N = 490). Self-reported drug use was verified with a rapid drug test which screened for opiate and cocaine metabolites in the urine. The presence of metabolites validated drug use in the 2–3 days prior to the test. Those with a negative drug test were not eligible but were compensated for travel to and from the research site.

After providing written informed consent, all participants completed a 90 minute interviewer-administered baseline survey. NIDUs (but not IDUs) returned 6 months later to complete a follow-up questionnaire. Both surveys ascertained demographic and social contextual characteristics, information about his/her drug use, and network composition. However, baseline questionnaires collected information about one's network over the past year and the 6 month survey collected information about one's network in the past 6 months. Participants received $30 and round-trip transportation for completing each questionnaire.

After completing the baseline survey, participants recruited through respondent driven sampling also received 1) three RDS coupons to recruit drug-using peers to participate in START, 2) an individual recruitment training with an interviewer to emphasize the importance of peer recruitment and provide tips on peer recruitment, and 3) an invitation to attend up to two group-facilitated peer recruitment training sessions (RDSTs) offered bi-weekly. RDS-recruited participants speaking only Spanish received an extended individual recruitment training since there were too few Spanish-speaking participants to conduct RDSTs in Spanish. Those attending RDSTs received $20 and round-trip transportation after completing a post-session survey that collected information about their experiences with peer recruitment and feedback regarding the session. As neither group received an intervention, the samples recruited through RDS and targeted street outreach differed with respect to participant recruitment. Additionally, RDS participants (but not those recruited by targeted street outreach) received advice on how to recruit peers (e.g., individual recruitment trainings, group-facilitated peer recruitment training sessions, and/or extended individual recruitment trainings).

This analysis was restricted to NIDUs (N = 490), as only NIDUs completed the 6 month follow-up survey. Of 490 NIDUs, 2 were removed from this analysis because of incomplete network information (one targeted street outreach recruit and one RDS recruit). An additional 159 participants were removed from this analysis because they did not complete the 6-month follow-up survey, for a final sample size of 329 (N = 92 TSO recruits and 237 RDS recruits).

Changes in HIV testing behaviors: It is recommended that injection drug users and heavy non-injection drug users seek testing for HIV every 6 months. Using this recommendation as a guideline for our analysis, we evaluated differences in self-reported HIV testing practices over the past 6 months at baseline and at the 6 month follow-up visit. Two variables were created to evaluate changes in HIV testing behavior and individuals who were HIV positive at baseline (N = 44) and who were missing information on HIV testing at either baseline or at the follow-up visit (N = 13) were excluded. To evaluate increases in HIV testing behavior, a variable was created to compare those who reported a recent HIV test at the 6-month follow-up visit (an HIV test between the baseline and 6-month follow-up visit) but no HIV test in the 6 months prior to the baseline interview (N = 50) to those who did not report a recent HIV test at either study visit (N = 25). To evaluate decreases in HIV testing behavior, a variable was created to compare those who reported receiving an HIV test 6 months prior to the baseline survey but not between the baseline and 6-month follow-up survey (N = 25) to those who reported a recent HIV test at both study visits (N = 170). One individual who reported an HIV test confirming his/her HIV positive status in the 6 months prior to the baseline survey was excluded from the variable comparing those who reported receiving an HIV test 6 months prior to the baseline survey but not between the baseline and 6-month follow-up survey to those who reported a recent HIV test at both study visits. Thus, 270 individuals were used to create these two variables; 75 individuals were used to assess increases in HIV testing behavior and 195 individuals were used to assess decreases in HIV testing behavior.

Changes in drug treatment utilization: Two variables ascertained changes in drug treatment utilization. To evaluate decreases in drug treatment utilization, individuals who reported utilizing any form of drug treatment in the 6 months prior to the baseline survey but not in the time between the baseline and 6-month survey (N = 48) were compared to those who reported utilization of any form of drug treatment in the 6 months prior to each study visit (N = 84). To evaluate increases in drug treatment utilization, individuals who reported utilizing any form of drug treatment between the baseline and 6-month survey visit but not in the 6 months prior to the baseline (N = 63) were compared to those who did not report utilizing any form of drug treatment in the 6 months prior to either study visit (N = 134).

At baseline, participants were asked to list the names, nicknames, or initials for each person in the past year 1) whom he/she could borrow $25 from, 2) who would let him/her stay at their place, 3) who he/she could talk to about personal or private matters, 4) who he/she used drugs with, 5) who he/she had sex with, 6) who he/she could ask for advice about health care or medical service, 7) who he/she could talk to about issues related to drug use (e.g., how to use drugs safely) and 8) who he/she could get information about social services like housing, welfare or social security. Individuals who were listed in 6–8 above were combined to create a variable to represent informational social support networks. The number of unique individuals recorded was his/her total network size. Participants were then asked to provide information about each of the names provided (i.e., demographic characteristics, history of incarceration, and information about whether he/she injected drugs, smoked crack, or snorted heroin). The proportion of drug using sex, incarcerated and social support networks at each study visit was calculated using the total network size at that study visit as the denominator. Network proportions at baseline were subtracted from network proportions at the 6-month follow up to evaluate changes in network composition over the study period.

Descriptive statistics were used to characterize the sample. Chi-square statistics were used to compare RDS- and targeted street outreach-recruited participants with respect to changes in HIV testing behaviors and drug treatment utilization over the past 6 months. T-tests were used to compare RDS- and targeted street outreach participants with respect to changes in his/her network composition over the past 6 months. As there were no major differences in homophily or drug using network size by any variables considered (e.g., gender, race/ethnicity, education, income, age, homelessness in the past 6 months, injection status, HIV status, heroin use in the past 6 months, cocaine use in the past 6 months, and crack use in the past 6 months) and the weights corresponding with each of these characteristics were low, weighted and unweighted RDS estimates did not differ significantly [41]. Because weighting one comparison group (RDS) and not the other (targeted street outreach) to correct for sampling biases could introduce additional biases to the comparison of these two sampling approaches, we did not apply weights to the respondent driven sample.

