For this study, we used the definition of IPV from the World Health Organization (provided above) [1], and we included violence by a current or former partner or spouse, whether cohabitating or not. Inclusion criteria were original research reporting: 1) data on the relationship between IPV and HIV; 2) data about the mechanisms of association between IPV and HIV; or, 3) theoretical discussion of the relationships between IPV and HIV. Studies had to specify their methods in order to be considered original research; reviews and commentaries were excluded. Exclusion criteria were studies which 1) looked at the association between IPV and HIV risk factors (instead of HIV infection); or 2) assessed violence only in commercial sex work or in non-intimate relationships, e.g. sexual assault by a stranger. Databases searched were Medline, PsycINFO, CINAHL, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Sociological Abstracts, Embase, Web of Science, PapersFirst, ProceedingsFirst, and ProQuest Dissertations and Theses, using a search strategy of text words and indexing terms. No language or date limits were applied. The search was conducted in September 2011 for all databases except Sociological Abstracts, for which the search was conducted in December 2011. Reference lists of review articles identified in the search and eligible articles were also hand searched. In addition, authors identified other eligible articles. In an initial review, two authors independently reviewed all titles and abstracts identified in the search. Full texts were retrieved if either reviewer determined that they were eligible for review. Two authors then independently reviewed each full text to assess eligibility, and for those deemed eligible, to extract relevant data. Disagreements regarding eligibility and extracted data were resolved through discussion. A hierarchy was used to classify the reason for excluding texts: 1) if no original data were included, this was classified as the reason, 2) if original data were included but no data on IPV were included, not about IPV was classified as the reason, 3) if original data on IPV were included but no data on HIV were included, not about HIV was classified as the reason, and 4) if original data on HIV and on IPV were included, but there were no data on the association between IPV and HIV, this was classified as the reason. When more than one record or paper was identified with data from the same study, all papers were included if they presented different data, or the paper with the earlier date was included if they presented the same data. Data extraction forms were piloted by two authors and modified accordingly. Data extracted included study characteristics: study publication year, study period in years, study location, i.e. city, state, and country, study site, e.g. clinic, community-based, school-based, or other, and study type, i.e. cohort, cross-sectional study, etc. ; data regarding IPV: definition, period of exposure, whether experienced or perpetrated; potential sources of bias; and qualitative or quantitative data regarding association. All direct quotations from participants in qualitative studies were included if they described the association between IPV and HIV. For assessment of bias in quantitative studies, components of a public health critical appraisal tool [11] were considered, with particular focus on selection of participants, measurement of exposure, and handling of confounders. Type of IPV was categorized as physical, sexual, or verbal, with verbal including verbal, psychological, or emotional IPV, or control. 