We examined the cross-sectional relationship between mean population blood pressure, cholesterol, and body mass index (BMI) and three socioeconomic variables: national income, average share of household expenditure spent on food, and proportion of population in urban areas. Blood pressure, cholesterol, and BMI are well-established cardiovascular risk factors and provide aggregate indicators of more complex dietary patterns (e.g., caloric intake, and consumption of salt, fats of different composition, and fruits and vegetables) and physical activity. Further, there are more comparable data from population-based health and nutrition surveys on these physiological indicators than on dietary patterns and physical activity, because these indicators can be more easily defined in a consistent manner and measured using standard techniques. National income is the commonly used indicator for a society's material well-being. The share of household expenditure spent on food is a measure of how household economic resources may constrain food purchase. If food forms a large proportion of total household expenditure, households may limit the total amount of food consumed, which should result in lower obesity and possibly lower levels of other risk factors if they are affected by overconsumption, or households may switch to less expensive but lower quality foods that increase various nutritional risk factors (e.g., higher salt, leading to higher blood pressure, or higher sugar and fat, leading to higher obesity) [14]. The proportion of the population living in urban areas is a proxy indicator of a number of environmental and lifestyle variables, such as physical activity in occupational and transportation domains, and of access to specific food types. For example, people living in rural areas often have higher levels of physical activity, reflecting their agricultural occupations and the need to walk longer distances for day-to-day activities [15]. Similarly, rural and urban populations may have differential access to various food types, possibly with seasonal variations. Urban populations are also likely to have higher access to screening and treatment for risks such as high blood pressure and cholesterol. Data sources for risk factors and economic indicators are provided in Table 1 (see Table S1 for list of countries). Systolic blood pressure (SBP), cholesterol, and BMI were age-standardized so that results could be compared across populations with different age structures. We used the World Health Organization (WHO) standard population [16] because it is a better representation of current population age structures than older standard populations (e.g., SEGI). The data used in the analysis were collected by researchers using different instruments. Strict criteria for study selection were applied to ensure methodological rigor and representativeness [17–19]. There were, nonetheless, differences among studies in a number of dimensions: sample size, national (versus sub-national) representativeness, year of the study, and age groups included. When restricted to only large-scale, nationally representative studies, the analysis resulted in associations very similar to those presented using the entire dataset; heterogeneity decreased after excluding all countries that did not fulfill these more stringent criteria.

Table data removed from full text. Table identifier and caption: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0020133.t001 Risk and Socioeconomic Variables Used in the Analysis a International dollar (Int$) is adjusted for purchasing power, and for inflation because the years of data for BMI, SBP, and cholesterol varied across countries. A local regression model was used to estimate the income–risk relationships [20]. A local regression model estimates the association across income levels without assuming a parametric model. Rather, the data determine the fitted curve. This is a preferable approach when there is no theoretical model for the shape of the association.

