Study site and experimental plots: We conducted the field study during May–June 2009 at “Alto del Telégrafo” (Guadarrama Mountains, Madrid Prov., central Spain) at an elevation of 1,900 m. Granite rock boulders and screes interspersed with shrubs (Cytisus oromediterraneus and Juniperus communis) predominated at the study site, together with meadows of Festuca and other grasses [46], [47]. In this area, lizards are active from late April to early October, mating in May–June and producing a single clutch in July [43]. We performed the field experiment on a large mountain slope oriented to the south where I. cyreni lizards were abundant, and where the habitat and microclimate were homogeneous. In this zone, we selected 12 rectangular areas (15×6 m each) that were separated by at least 25 m. Inside each area, we used color flags to mark two plots (2×2 m each), the centers of which were separated by 7 m. Each plot was selected to include a high cover of large rocks and some bushes, like the microhabitats selected by lizards [46], [47]. We performed the experimental supplementations within these plots. One of the plots within each area was randomly assigned to the experimental treatment and the other was assigned to the control treatment. These areas were not switched between days (i.e., the same plots designated as experimental in the first day were used as experimental during all observations). We preferred this approach instead of randomizing to allow that lizards could move through both areas and finally select to settle in some areas, thus, allowing a cumulative effect through time. We considered that it was very unlikely that lizards would switch frequently between territories once they had been established, which would confound the results if we changed the location of the treatments every day. We recorded microhabitat structure to ensure that experimental and control plots were homogeneous. We noted the presence and types of vegetation and different substrates at different heights on four 1 m transects [46], [47]. Results of General Linear Models (GLMs) showed that there were no significant differences for any habitat variable (dependent variables) between the control and experimental plots (paired within each area as a repeated measures factor) (0.14<F1,11<0.71, 0.22<P<0.70 for all variables).

We made the experimental supplementation during four separate days (27th May, 2nd June, 3rd June and 11th June) with sun and temperature conditions that allowed lizards to be fully active. We initially intended to perform the experiment on alternate days, but bad weather conditions at the high mountain altitude limited the activity of lizards entirely or to a great amount, which meant we could only perform the experiment during these four days. We prepared two liquid solutions (experimental and control) on the same days as the tests. For the experimental solution, we filled clean dark glass bottles with dichloromethane (DCM) and dissolved ergosterol in it (authentic standard; both compounds were GC grade, from Sigma-Aldrich Chemicals) in a proportion of 25 g ergosterol/1 L of DCM. In a previous study, female rock lizards showed high chemosensory responses (i.e., high tongue-flick rates) to cotton swabs impregnated with this concentration of ergosterol [29]. These responses were only slightly higher than average responses to natural femoral secretions of males [29]. The control solution was DCM alone treated similarly and kept in similar bottles. The DCM alone elicits very low chemosensory responses in female rock lizards [29]. Then, we mixed the solutions with a vortex, and kept all the bottles in a portable refrigerator to transfer them to the field. In the early morning (from 06.30 h to 07.30 h, GMT), before lizards were active, we used different painting brushes to impregnate rocks with the experimental solution or the control one within the designated plots. We used 100 cL of the appropriate solution for each plot to impregnate some areas of all large and medium sized exposed rocks present within each 2×2 plot. We intended to simulate the scent marks of males, by using a small brush to impregnate small selected rectangular areas (about 15×5 cm), haphazardly distributed along the rocks, but we specially impregnated locations on the tops of high rocks or close to refuges (rock crevices). We selected these areas because lizards are known to deposit fecal pellets and scent marks in these particular locations [18], [48], and this is where chemosensory exploration of substrates by tongue-flicking seems to be more intense (pers. observ.). Immediately after setting out the experimental solution, the DCM readily evaporated leaving the ergosterol deposited on the rocks. The control solution evaporated entirely without leaving any solid residue.

To estimate the density of lizards we made seven counts of lizards observed in the control and experimental plots every day, and calculated average numbers of lizards observed in each plot per census in each day. We made five estimates of lizard densities in five different days: the first estimate was made three days before starting the experiment (to obtain initial densities), with a subsequent estimate being made on each of the four days immediately after we manipulated rocks. Although this method only provided estimations of relative densities, we preferred this non-invasive method to a mark-recapture study, which may have affected the normal behavior of lizards. Because we studied immediate responses (space use) of lizards to the manipulation in a given day, the effort needed to capture lizards during a day would not have allowed us to observe their normal space use behavior in response to the chemical manipulation in that day. Also, because the mating season of these lizards is very limited in time (only a few days immediately after emerging from hibernation), we could not simultaneously perform a mark-recapture study with the observations of natural responses of lizards to the scent manipulation. During this study, lizards emerged from night refuges around 07.30 h (GMT), when environmental temperatures were appropriate, and lizards started basking on rocks to achieve optimal body temperatures before moving around for foraging or looking for mates. So we started census of lizards at 08.00 h. We made seven censuses every day, one every 30 min, until the hot midday temperatures started to lower the activity of lizards. In each census, one experimenter quietly approached one plot and stopped at a distance of about 5 m. From several points located at this distance surrounding the plot and observing with binoculars, we were able to achieve a total vision of all points in the plots where lizards could be active. Our censuses did not disturb the behavior of lizards, which did not show alarm or escape responses to our presence and continued with their normal activities during the observations. We recorded the numbers of lizards observed active within the experimental and control plots and in a 1 m area surrounding each plot (a total area of 4×4 m per plot). Based on the size and coloration of lizards, we classified individuals as adult males (with dorsal green coloration and large heads), adult females (with dorsal brown coloration and small heads), and non-reproductive subadults (brown coloration and clearly smaller in body size; i.e., SVL<60 mm) [41], [42]. When several individuals were observed in the same census, the simultaneous observation, or the differential characteristics, of different individuals easily allowed the number of different individuals to be easily estimated in one census. Because lizards moved frequently through their home ranges, we considered that lizards could be aware of the manipulations of the two plots in each area, and that observations of lizards close to the control or experimental plots (within the 4×4 m area surrounding the centre of each plot) could reflect a preference of lizards for using microhabitats within or close to a particular plot. In comparison with natural home ranges of this lizard species [42], [43], the surveyed area (4×4 m) could be similar in size to the natural core area of a lizard's home range (i.e., the most exclusive and used locations based on a density function of sightings, which is around 4 m2 for females and 18 m2 for males), while the total size of a natural home range (i.e., averages between 75–150 m2 for males and 28–50 m2 for females) would allow a lizard to explore both plots in an area. To standardize search effort in all observations, we spent 5 min watching each pair of plots before moving to another pair of plots. For each plot, we first calculated the daily average number of lizards observed per census (adult males or females or subadults) from the seven censuses made in each day. We used GLMs to examine variations in the daily average number of lizards observed in a census per plot (square root transformed because this was a count variable) between treatments (control vs. experimental plots paired within each area) and days (one initial day before starting the experiments, and the four days of the manipulation), both as repeated measures factors. We included the interaction in the model to test whether differences between the control and experimental plots varied between days. Post hoc pairwise comparisons were based on Tukey's honestly significant difference (HSD) tests [49].

Association of females with males: To assess the effect of the manipulation on potential mating opportunities for males, during the censuses we noted the number of females that were observed associated in close proximity (less than 50 cm) to a male [50]. In this and other lizard species, a male close to a female could obtain a copulation with that female because even if the female would not accept it, the male might try to obtain a forced mating. However, under the mate attraction hypothesis, because we manipulated the characteristics of the territories, but not the characteristics of the males found there, we did not expect that females accepted matings from any male found in the plot, but only if the male was “congruent” with that expected by females based on their sexual chemical signals in scent marks (i.e., visual signals would confirm the honesty of the chemical signal). Thus, we did not record the number of actual matings observed, as these were not considered representative of the normal behavior of lizards outside of the experimental conditions. We used a two-tailed binomial test to compare the number of females found associated to a male in the control and experimental plots, and used a chi-square test to compare the proportions of males observed alone or close to females in the control and experimental plots. Although observations of the same individual lizards could occur in different days, this would not affect the results, because multiple matings with the same or different females will increase the mating success of a male, given that multiple paternity occurs in this species [43].

