A dynamic, stochastic, agent-based model, written in NetLogo, was used to simulate the growth and mortality of a snail population, and infection by S. mansoni. The model has a time step of one hour. Each hour agents develop at temperature dependent rates; and can die, produce eggs, cause infection, etc with temperature dependent probabilities. The concept of ‘heat units’ is introduced in the model and used to track the development of snail eggs and juvenile snails, both of which take longer to reach maturity (hatch and become sexually mature respectively) away from optimum temperatures. Each heat unit is arbitrarily set to represent 1% of the total development needed to enter the next developmental stage. For instance, a juvenile snail living at a constant temperature of 15°C will take 32 hour to gain one heat unit, and 131 days to become sexually mature, and a juvenile snail living at 27°C will take 9 hours to gain one heat unit and 39 days to become mature. Figure 1 shows a diagram of the model structure. Full details of the model structure are in (Model description S1), and a brief description is given below.

Figure data removed from full text. Figure identifier and caption: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101462.g001 Diagram of the model structure.Boxes indicate classes of agents. Solid arrows indicate that agents can change from one class into another. Dashed lines indicate the production of one class by another. Dotted lines indicate infection. Red outlines and arrows indicate the presence of Schistosoma mansoni. Agents of all classes can die and be removed from the model. Table S1 contains details of the rates and probabilities that determine the movement of agents between classes.

Snails are born into the model as eggs. They accumulate heat units over time at a temperature dependent rate. When they accumulate 100 heat units they become juvenile snails [20]. A description of heat units is given in Model description S1. Like snail eggs, juvenile snails accumulate heat units at a temperature dependent rate over time, becoming adult snails when they have accumulated a further 100 heat units. Adult snails produce snail eggs at a rate that is dependent on temperature. Experimental studies suggest that extended periods of high temperatures during development are detrimental to reproductive development [21]. Egg production is therefore reduced in snails that were exposed to large numbers of degree hours above a threshold temperature as juveniles. Snail eggs, juveniles and adults die and are removed from the model at temperature dependent rates. In laboratory conditions with a plentiful supply of food a high density of snails does not affect the time to first or maximum egg laying, or snail mortality rates [22]. It does however reduce the number of fertile eggs laid by each snail each week. Field studies support the idea that unfavourable conditions have a greater effect on egg production than snail mortality [23]. In the model, it is assumed that the environment can support 300 snails with no negative effect on egg production. Above this number, the rate of egg production drops. At population numbers of more than 600 snails, snail mortality rates also increase. Thresholds of 300 and 600 snails were chosen for practical reasons, with models with higher numbers taking longer to run, and models with smaller numbers requiring more runs in total to reduce stochasticity. With these thresholds, each model run takes approximately 3–5 minutes. These numbers can be scaled up or down with no effect on mean model results, provided that all parameters that are functions of snail population size, and the rate of miracidia introduction, are scaled accordingly. Juvenile and adult snails in the model have one of three infection states: uninfected, prepatent or infectious. All snails are uninfected when they first hatch. Snails can change state from uninfected to prepatent and from prepatent to infectious only. Miracidia are introduced into the model at a constant rate. No diurnal variation in the rate of introduction is simulated as schistosome eggs in stool hatch gradually over a period of many hours or days, as the stool breaks down in water [24]. This will have the effect of ‘smoothing out’ any diurnal variation in the rate of stool entering water bodies. Miracidia gain biological age at a temperature dependent rate, and die at a biological age dependent rate. An additional, temperature and age-independent mortality rate can also be simulated. Each hour, every miracidium in the model has the chance to infect a snail. The probability of infection is dependent on the biological age of the miracidium, the water temperature, and the number of snails in the model. When it is determined that a miracidium should infect a snail, the snail is chosen at random from all snails in the model. If the snail is uninfected, the snail becomes prepatent and the miracidium dies. If the snail is already prepatent or infectious then the miracidium dies, but there is no change to the snail. Upon infection with a miracidium, uninfected juvenile and adult snails change infection state from uninfected to prepatent. They then start to gain heat units at a temperature dependent rate. When sufficient heat units have been accumulated, they change state to become infectious. Prepatent adult snails cease to produce eggs when they gain 50% of the heat units necessary to become infectious. Infectious snails do not produce eggs and have a higher mortality rate than prepatent and uninfected snails. Infectious snails produce cercariae at rate which is dependent on temperature and the time of day. Like miracidia, cercariae gain biological age at a temperature dependent rate, and die at a biological age dependent rate. An additional, temperature and age-independent mortality rate can also be simulated. The main output of our model is ‘infection risk’, a measure of the number of cercariae in the model adjusted by their decreasing probability of successfully causing infection with increasing biological age [25]. Human and adult worms are not simulated. This is because the worm stage of the parasite's lifecycle usually takes place inside a human host and is therefore unlikely to be affected by temperature. The link between human infection risk and snail infection risk is also unclear. It is likely that there is an overall positive correlation between cercaria numbers and miracidium numbers, however differences in human water contact, defecation practices and migration will mean that the relationship varies greatly in different areas. Finally, the relationship between infection risk and the number of worms will depend on the overall prevalence and intensity of infection in an area (which will depend on human water contact and defecation practices as well cercariae numbers) as repeated infection leads to partial immunity [26]. For these reasons, humans and schistosome worms are not modelled explicitly. Instead, miracidia are introduced into the model at a constant rate and human infection risk is indicated by a function of the number of cercariae in the model and their probability of causing infection upon contact.

The model was parameterised using a combination of experimental and field data from B. pfeifferi and S. mansoni. All parameter values were based on empirical data. Full details are given in (Model description S1 and figures S1–S8 in Model description S1).

Water temperatures were modelled as a sine wave. Three sets of scenarios with different levels of diurnal variation in temperature were modelled: one with constant temperatures, one where maximum and minimum temperatures varied from the mean temperature by 2°C, and one where they varied by 5°C. For each of the three sets of scenarios, two scenarios were modelled. In one, the ‘lake’ scenarios, cercariae and miracidia had temperature dependent mortality rates only, estimated from mortality rates in laboratory experiments. In the other, the ‘river’ scenarios, an additional temperature independent mortality rate of 0.5 per cercaria and miracidium per hour was simulated. The first scenario (‘lake’) approximates conditions in still water such as lakes and ponds and the second (‘river’) conditions in flowing water such as streams and rivers, where many miracidia and cercariae are likely to be quickly washed away. The scenarios are summarised in table 1. The lake and river scenarios can be thought of as extremes, with conditions in many water bodies falling somewhere between the two.

Table data removed from full text. Table identifier and caption: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101462.t001 Summary of the simulated scenarios. Each set of scenarios was run for all temperatures at which the simulated snail populations could survive indefinitely, with temperature increasing in 0.5°C increments. The number of snails in the model is calculated as the total number of uninfected, prepatent and infectious juvenile and adult snails. The model was run for five years to reach equilibrium (to become independent of initial conditions), and then outputs were averaged over two years and a minimum of 200 runs. Both mean daily infection risk and mean infection risk by hour of the day were calculated.

