In December 2009, with Ryan White Part A funding, the NYC Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DOHMH) launched the HIV Care Coordination Program (CCP) to support persons at high risk for, or with a recent history of, poor HIV care outcomes. CCP eligibility criteria permit enrollment of HIV-infected adults or emancipated minors who are eligible for local Ryan White Part A services (based on residence within the New York grant area and household income <435% of federal poverty level) and who are (1) newly diagnosed with HIV; (2) never in care or lost to care for at least 9 months; (3) irregularly in care or often missing appointments; (4) starting a new ART regimen; (5) experiencing ART adherence barriers; or (6) manifesting treatment failure or ART resistance. [14] The CCP combines various evidence-based programmatic elements including case management, patient navigation, directly observed therapy (DOT), structured health promotion in home/field visits, and outreach to assist patients in accessing medical care and support services, such as mental health treatment, substance use treatment, and housing assistance. The intensity and focus of these services can be tailored to meet individual needs and circumstances. The intervention has previously been described, and CCP materials are available on the DOHMH website [14, 22]. Importantly, the CCP was rolled out purely as a service program, with no randomization or contemporaneous control/comparison group. Early assessments of CCP outcomes used individuals as their own historical controls (i.e., pre-post) [8, 14, 22]. While these assessments offered preliminary evidence suggestive of program effectiveness, they could not distinguish program effects from secular improvements in VLS in NYC during the same time period. [23] Focusing on the last viral load (VL) in a 12-month follow-up period, this study aimed to compare VLS proportions between CCP clients and demographically and clinically similar PLWH who, during the same time period, were eligible for but did not enroll in the CCP (“non-CCP PLWH”).

We retrospectively constructed an observational cohort of persons enrolled and not enrolled in the CCP by merging provider-reported programmatic data with data from the longitudinal population-based NYC HIV Surveillance Registry (“the Registry”). Our approach to constructing an observational cohort using the Registry has previously been detailed. [24] The Registry contains demographic and laboratory information on all diagnoses of HIV (since 2000) and AIDS (since 1981) reported in NYC, with the addition of comprehensive and longitudinal HIV-related laboratory reporting (including all CD4-lymphocyte [CD4] and VL test results) starting in 2005. The Registry does not contain direct measures of primary care or HIV treatment status [25]. However, validation work by DOHMH [26, 27] has shown that VL/CD4 tests reported to surveillance are reliable indicators of receipt of HIV care in NYC, and laboratory reporting is considered to be ~99% complete. Vital status information is updated through regular matches with local and national death data. Data on CCP client enrollments were drawn from the DOHMH Electronic System for HIV/AIDS Reporting and Evaluation (eSHARE), a secure, Web-based, named programmatic reporting system. In eSHARE, we identified all persons who enrolled in the CCP from December 1, 2009 to March 31, 2013. The 2013 cut-off was chosen so that we would have adequate power to detect a modest effect as statistically significant and so that we would be able to examine and compare viral suppression over the short-term (as reported here) and long-term (analyses extending out to March 2017), with the same cohort. Using data reported to the Registry as of September 30, 2014, we identified all persons who were diagnosed with HIV as of March 31, 2013, were living 12 months after diagnosis, were at least 18 years old as of March 31, 2013, and had at least one CD4 or VL result dated between December 1, 2007 and March 31, 2013. To ensure adequate outcome observation time, we excluded CCP clients who died within 12 months of program enrollment (n = 279). This study was approved by the institutional review boards at The City University of New York and the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene. For these secondary analyses of de-identified data, we received a waiver for informed consent under 45 CFR 46.116(d)(2).

We constructed a non-CCP comparison group of PLWH who were similar to CCP enrollees in four steps. First, through the NYC Registry match, we identified PLWH who were not enrolled in the CCP but met broad clinical eligibility criteria for CCP enrollment at one or more times (CCP eligibility window) during December 1, 2009 to March 31, 2013. Second, we assigned eligible non-CCP PLWH pseudo-enrollment dates falling within their windows of CCP eligibility. Third, we limited to PLWH with evidence of recent NYC HIV medical care (≥1 CD4 or VL test reported to the Registry in the 24 months after the pseudo-enrollment date). Finally, we matched CCP enrollees to non-CCP PLWH according to baseline treatment status, enrollment/pseudo-enrollment dates and propensity for enrollment in the CCP. Step 1) identify persons meeting broad CCP eligibility criteria: Using information from the Registry, we identified persons as eligible for enrollment in the CCP if they were 1) newly diagnosed with HIV from December 1, 2008 to March 31, 2013; 2) out of medical care, defined as lacking CD4 and VL laboratory monitoring for any nine-month post-diagnosis period during December 1, 2007 to March 31, 2013; 3) treatment naïve, defined as ever having a CD4 count <200 reported as of March 31, 2013, but not initiating antiretroviral treatment [ART] (never having a ≥1-log drop in VL within 3 months, or an unsuppressed VL [>200 copies/μL] followed by a suppressed VL [≤200 copies/μL]) as of the date of a CD4 count <200 [25]; 4) exhibiting poor ART adherence as of March 31, 2012, defined as not achieving VLS or not having any VL tests reported in the first 12 months after ART initiation (a ≥1-log drop in VL within 3 months, or an unsuppressed VL followed by a suppressed VL) [25]; 5) experiencing viral rebound (a suppressed VL followed by 2 consecutive unsuppressed VL tests in the 12 months following the suppressed VL, from December 1, 2007 to March 31, 2013); or 6) registering a high VL (≥10,000 copies/μL) from December 1, 2008 to March 31, 2013. Step 2) assign eligible persons in the non-CCP PLWH comparison group a pseudo-enrollment date: Non-CCP PLWH who met any of the eligibility criteria were assigned an eligibility window (S1 Table), or a range of time between December 2009 and March 2013 (the CCP enrollment period), during which they met the above CCP eligibility criteria. For example, persons were considered eligible as “newly diagnosed” during the 12 months following diagnosis. Persons could be assigned multiple eligibility windows based on qualifying for the CCP via multiple Registry criteria and/or qualifying under the same criterion multiple times. To identify a start of follow-up for each member of the comparison group (i.e., time zero from which to prospectively assess outcomes in comparison to those in the CCP group), we randomly assigned each non-CCP PLWH a pseudo-enrollment date that fell within one of their eligibility windows. Further, to control for secular trends in VLS, pseudo-enrollment dates were assigned with probabilities such that their temporal distribution matched that of the enrollment dates among CCP enrollees (i.e., frequency matching). For persons who died, eligibility windows ended at least 12 months prior to the date of death, to ensure 12 months for outcome observation following the pseudo-enrollment date.

Step 3) identify NYC medical care recipients in the non-CCP PLWH group: After pseudo-enrollment dates were assigned, we restricted the eligible pool to persons who had at least one valid CD4 or VL test reported to the Registry in the 24 months after the pseudo-enrollment date. We required one laboratory test to identify persons accessing HIV medical care in NYC after the pseudo-enrollment date, as CCP enrollment and service initiation entails connection to NYC HIV medical care [28].

Step 4) propensity model and match: After constructing this eligible non-CCP-enrolled population, we prepared to match persons in the non-CCP PLWH comparison group to those in the CCP group using baseline treatment status, propensity scores, and enrollment/pseudo-enrollment dates. Given that 12-month VLS outcomes would be expected to differ by baseline treatment status/engagement, we created four mutually exclusive baseline treatment status groups: 1) newly diagnosed (in the 12 months prior to enrollment/pseudo-enrollment date), 2) consistently suppressed (≥2 VLs ≥90 days apart, and all VLs ≤200 copies/μL, in the 12 months prior to enrollment/pseudo-enrollment date), 3) consistently unsuppressed (all VLs reported >200 copies/μL or no VLs reported in the 12 months prior to enrollment/pseudo-enrollment), or 4) inconsistently suppressed (at least 1 VL ≤200 copies/μL, but not all VLs ≤200 copies/μL, in the 12 months prior to enrollment/pseudo-enrollment). We used logistic regression to estimate the propensity for enrollment in the CCP within each of the above 4 groups. We combined two baseline treatment status groups, groups 3 and 4, for one propensity score model, because we hypothesized the propensity of enrollment in the CCP would be influenced by the same potential confounders for these two groups; when we estimated the propensity for enrollment with individual models for groups 3 and 4, the effect estimates from the pooled model did not differ from the effect estimates from the individual models. We report the results for the pooled model because we were able to match a greater proportion of CCP enrollees, enhancing generalizability. Subsequent matching occurred within each of the four groups. For the three propensity score models, we started with a model that included all of our a priori hypothesized and measured confounders and used backward selection to identify the model with the lowest value of Akaike’s Information Criterion (AIC). The variables that we suspected were confounders of the relationship between CCP enrollment and the VLS outcome were sex, race/ethnicity, age at enrollment/pseudo-enrollment, country of birth, HIV transmission risk, year of diagnosis, baseline VL, baseline CD4, successful linkage to HIV care within three months of diagnosis, presence of an AIDS diagnosis within one year of HIV diagnosis, number of VL laboratory tests reported in the year prior to enrollment/pseudo-enrollment, residential ZIP code at enrollment/pseudo-enrollment, HIV prevalence and poverty level within ZIP code at enrollment/pseudo-enrollment, and interaction terms for baseline CD4 and baseline VL, baseline CD4 and race, sex and risk, and year of diagnosis and risk. Per the American Community Survey, poverty level within the residential ZIP code at enrollment/pseudo-enrollment was classified as high (poverty greater than the median poverty level for a given year of enrollment/pseudo-enrollment) versus low. HIV prevalence was based on aggregated NYC HIV surveillance data for the ZIP code by year of enrollment/pseudo-enrollment, and was classified as high (prevalence greater than the median HIV prevalence for a given year) versus low. Within each of the four baseline treatment status groups, we matched on propensity scores and enrollment/pseudo-enrollment dates (± 3 months). We used a 1:1 'greedy' match technique, and the match algorithm proceeded sequentially from 8 to 1 decimal places of the propensity score [29, 30]. We considered a standardized difference of ≥0∙1 to indicate an imbalance in the measured confounders between the CCP and non-CCP groups [31]. The final match included no imbalances ≥0∙1.

Outcome definition and Care Coordination Program effectiveness estimate: The VLS outcome was based on the last VL laboratory result reported to the Registry in the 12 months following the enrollment/pseudo-enrollment date, and was dichotomized as ≤200 or >200 copies/μL. Persons with no VL in the Registry for the entire 12-month follow-up period were classified as not having VLS. While rare, 1∙3% (87/6,812) of the CCP and 5∙4% (353/6,812) of the non-CCP PLWH were missing a VL result. We used a GEE model with binary error distribution and identity link to estimate the difference in proportion of CCP and non-CCP participants with VLS, accounting for the matched-pairs design. The arithmetic difference was expressed in percentage point units. We used a GEE model with binary error distribution and log link to estimate the relative effect of the CCP on VLS, accounting for the matching. Absolute differences and relative risks were estimated with the GENMOD procedure in SAS version 9∙3 (SAS Institute, Cary, N.C.) The absolute and relative effect of the CCP was estimated for each of the four baseline treatment status groups.

