We conducted this study as a population-based cohort study. The geographic area included two Danish regions (North Denmark Region and Capital Region) with a total population of 1.7 million persons. All hospitalized patients aged 30 to 65 years with first time bacteremia from 2000 through 2008 were included in the cohort.

The Danish tax-funded welfare system provides free access to health care, education, and benefits such as pensions and unemployment coverage. All citizens are granted free services at general practitioners and public hospitals. Only 1% of hospital beds are in the private sector. Since April 1, 1968, all citizens in Denmark have been registered in the Civil Registration System. A unique personal identification number (civil registration number) allows accurate linkage of information among national registries, including medical registries.

Identification of Patients with Bacteremia: We obtained data from the Danish Collaborative Bacteremia Network (DACOBAN). This network includes the Departments of Clinical Microbiology in the North Denmark Region (Aalborg Hospital) and the greater Copenhagen area (Hvidovre Hospital and Herlev Hospital). DACOBAN was established to enable coordinated surveillance of all cases of bacteremia in the two regions and to study risk factors and prognostic factors for bacteremia [16]. The three departments that serve these regions record data on all microbiological specimens, including blood cultures, in an electronic laboratory information system (ADBakt, Autonik, Ramsta, Sweden). A research database that consists of all patients with a first-time diagnosis of bacteremia between January 1, 2000 and December 31, 2008 has been established from data from these laboratory information systems. Bacteremia was defined as bacterial or fungal growth in blood cultures where contamination had been ruled out. Coagulase-negative staphylococci, Corynebacterium spp., Bacillus spp. and Propionibacterium acnes were regarded as contaminants unless they were isolated from two or more separate blood culture sets within a 5-day period [17]. We only included patients in the age group of 30 to 65 years because we assumed that most of them had completed their education and were of working age. The civil registration number, age, sex, the date on which the first positive blood culture was drawn (date of bacteremia diagnosis), hospital and specialty, microbial agent, and place of acquisition of infection (community-acquired or nosocomial) were included in the database for all patients. Bacteremia was defined as community-acquired if the first positive blood culture was obtained within 48 hours after hospital admission and as nosocomial if it was drawn more than 48 hours after hospital admission.

SES was based on patients’ educational level and personal income. Although the two indicators are related they measure different aspects of socioeconomic stratification. Formal education is normally completed in young adulthood and will therefore to some extent measure early life SES. In contrast, income can change over a life course, but may better capture aspects of SES later in life [18], [19]. To assess the effect of both early life SES and later life SES on mortality after bacteremia, we examined both SES indicators. SES data were obtained for all patients through registries maintained by the government agency Statistics Denmark [20]–[22]. These registries contain detailed individual-level socioeconomic data, updated yearly, for all Danish citizens. Information on patients’ highest completed education was obtained from the Population’s Education Register, which consists of data generated from surveys and from the administrative records of educational institutions. In 2008 the register contained valid information on education for 97% of the Danish population born from 1945 to 1990 [20]. We categorized educational level into primary/lower secondary education (low), upper secondary education (medium), and tertiary education (high) according to the International Standard Classification of Education (1997) [23]. Patients’ personal annual income was all income subject to income taxation (wages and salaries, and all types of benefits and pensions). Income data was obtained from the Income Statistics Register. Data in the register are primarily supplied by tax authorities and the income data are assumed to equal the real income [21]. Personal annual income was adjusted for inflation according to the year 2000 value of the Danish crown (DKK) and was grouped into tertiles: low-income (1st tertile), middle-income (2nd tertile) and high-income (3rd tertile). We also obtained data on patients’ employment status, nationality, cohabitation status, and marital status. Employment status was grouped into employed/self-employed, unemployed/employment subsidized by labor market arrangement and early retirement pensioners. We used cohabitation status and marital status as markers for social support. For all variables, we used data from the year preceding the index date of the bacteremia diagnosis.

We obtained data from the Danish National Patient Registry for all diagnoses recorded from the start of the registry until the date of bacteremia diagnosis. The registry contains information for almost 100% of all inpatient admissions to public and private non-psychiatric hospitals in Denmark since 1977 and from outpatient and emergency room visits since 1995. Each record includes one primary diagnosis and up to 20 secondary diagnoses, which have been classified according to the International Classification of Diseases [24]. Pre-existing comorbidity was summarized according to the Charlson Comorbidity Index, which was originally developed to predict 1-year mortality in hospitalized medical patients [25]. Since then, the index has been adapted and validated for use with hospital diagnoses and has been used in previous studies of the association between comorbidity and survival after bacteremia [13], [26], [27]. The index consists of 19 disease groups and each disease group is assigned a specific weight depending on the severity of the pre-existing condition. Based on the Charlson index scores three levels of comorbidity were defined: 0 (low), corresponding to patients with no recorded pre-existing comorbidity; 1–2 (medium), and >2 (high). Diagnoses related to substance abuse (alcohol and drug abuse) are not included in the Charlson index and may influence prognosis after bacteremia. Therefore, we also collected data on previous alcohol- and drug-abuse-related diagnoses from the National Patient Registry.

Patients were treated in 1 of 16 public hospitals. We characterized these hospitals according to number of hospital beds, hospital volume, and medical school affiliation. We categorized hospital beds, setup and staffed for use, as less than 300 beds or 300 beds or more. Hospital volume was defined as the annual number of bacteremia patients treated at the institution and categorized as low-volume (≤99 bacteremia patients treated per year), medium-volume (100–299 per year), and high-volume (≥300 per year) hospitals. Teaching hospitals were defined as hospitals directly affiliated with a medical school.

Our outcome was all-cause mortality within 30 days after the bacteremia diagnosis. We obtained data on each patient’s vital status from the Danish Civil Registration System [28]. This registry contains daily updated information on all changes in vital status and migration for all Danish citizens. Patients were followed from the date of their diagnosis to the time of death, date of emigration, or completion of 30 days of follow-up, whichever occurred first.

We first constructed contingency tables to provide information on baseline characteristics and crude outcomes according to SES, which were inferred on the basis of patients’ educational level and personal income. Using Kaplan-Meier plots we examined mortality within 30 days after bacteremia according to SES. A Cox proportional hazards model was constructed to determine the association between SES and 30-day mortality. We performed a sequential cumulative adjustment analysis to assess whether differences in social support (cohabitation and marital status), pre-existing comorbidity (comorbidity included in the Charlson Comorbidity Index and conditions related to substance abuse), infection characteristics (place of acquisition, microbial agent, and admitting specialty) or hospital characteristics (number of hospital beds, hospital volume, and medical school affiliation) accounted for socioeconomic differences in mortality. We included the potential mediators in our analyses in a sequence that reflected the temporal relation of the potential mediators (e.g., we assumed that SES would normally precede comorbidity existing at the time of the bacteremia diagnosis). Log-minus-log plots were used to confirm that the proportional hazards assumption was not violated [29]. All analyses were performed with Stata statistical software, version 11.2 (StataCorp, College Station, TX). The study was approved by the Danish Data Protection Agency (Record no. 2010-41-5650). Informed consent was not required by Danish law.

