The study was approved by the ethics committee of Teikyo University Chiba Medical Center (study number 09-30) and performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants, after procedures had been fully explained.

Sixty six healthy subjects, 27 depressed patients in remission, and 35 antidepressant treatment-resistant depressed patients were enrolled on this study (Table 1). The treatment-resistant depressed patients were the same sample used in our previous study [4]. All patients met the DSM-IV criteria for major depressive disorder (MDD) (first episode) [24]. Patients were recruited from the outpatient clinics of Teikyo University Chiba Medical Center. All patients were physically healthy and free of alcohol or drug abuse. Inclusion criteria required symptoms of moderate depression, after treatment with at least two antidepressants, for 8 weeks [2]. Scores for patients were 14 or more on the 17-item Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAM-D), on which remission or recovery was scored at 7 or less [1]. Healthy control subjects with no past history of psychiatric disorders or drug dependence were recruited. Clinical information on all subjects is provided in Table 1. The duration of depressive states in patients with treatment-resistant depression was significantly longer than in those with remitted depression.

Table data removed from full text. Table identifier and caption: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071964.t001 Demographic information of subjects. Data are shown as mean ± SD.Parenthesis is the range.HAM-D: Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression. *P<0.01,**P<0.001 as compared to the remitted group (Student's t-test).

Personality Scores and Psychological Tests: Personality was assessed using NEO PI-R. NEO PI-R utilized the five-factor model of personality: neuroticism, extraversion, openness, agreeableness, and conscientiousness [5]. Each domain scale is comprised of six item facets. The NEO-PI-R consists of 240 items answered on a five- point Likert scale, ranging from absolutely disagree to strongly agree. Raw scores were converted to T-scores for standardization. The mean and SD for each dimension are 50 and 10, respectively. TCI Scores in patients with treatment-resistant depression were taken from our recently reported study [4]. In this study, we used TCI-125, a shortened version of the TCI [3], [25], [26]. Items are rated on a four-point scale. This test covers four dimensions of temperament: harm avoidance, novelty seeking, reward dependence, and persistence, and three dimensions of character: self-directedness, cooperativeness, and self-transcendence.

Data from five domains of the NEO were first analyzed using multiple analysis of variance (MANOVA), to check for the simultaneous existence of significant differences. Statistical differences among the three groups were determined by one-way factorial analysis of variance (ANOVA), followed by multiple comparison testing (Scheffe's test). Chi-square test was used for categorical variables. Statistical evaluation between the two groups was performed using a two-tailed Student's t-test. Coefficients among scores for NEO and TCI were estimated by Pearson coefficient. Differences were considered to be significant when p values were less than 0.01.

