All the animal care and research involved was approved by the departmental direction of veterinary services (Ille et Vilaine, Permit number 005283) in accordance with the European Communities Council Directive of 24 November 1986 (86/609/EEC).

Mills & Faure [18] described in detail the selection procedures used to develop LTI and STI lines. Briefly, birds of two commercial strains where reciprocally crossed so as to constitute a common base line population for the two selected lines. TI was estimated when chicks were 9 to 10 days old. TI duration was defined as the time when an unrestrained chick remained immobile after 10 s of manual restraint. The maximum number of induction (NI) allowed to induce TI was limited to five, and TI was limited to 300 s. When TI could not be induced after five attempts the bird was deemed to be unsusceptible and given score of NI  = 5 and TI = 0 s. When a bird failed to right itself after 300 s, it was given scores of NI between 1 and 5, and TI = 300 s [22]. Adult females and chicks used in this study belonged respectively to the 36th and 37th generations of these genetic lines. A control line was also used, characterised by an intermediate TI level. All birds came from the INRA UEPEAT experimental unit (1295), Nouzilly, France.

For each experiment, maternal behaviour was induced in 22 STI and 21 LTI adult female quail via an original procedure facilitating rapid emergence of maternal care [17], [26]. Chicks arrived in the laboratory a few hours after they had hatched and were wing banded. At the beginning of a dark phase, three chicks were placed underneath each female in a nest box and then each box was shut up for the night. Tactile and auditory stimulations emitted by chicks induce a rapid emergence of parental responses in females that express the full repertoire of maternal behaviour the following morning [17]. Maternal behaviour includes warming (the female erects her feathers and crouches over her chicks to keep them warm), maternal calls (cooing, a “hoarse peep” and a food call) and brood defence. As LTI females require longer than STI females to develop maternal care during the first day of mothering [17], chicks from a commercial line were used for induction. Females were observed for 5 hours and only those who expressed the full maternal behavioural repertoire were retained (in similar proportions for the two lines) and the commercial chicks were then replaced by three experimental chicks coming from the same genetic line. So, brooded groups were constituted of one female with 3 adopted chicks. Three successive experiments, involving the same maternal females, were conducted at 5-week intervals under similar conditions of temperature and light/dark cycles: (1) 45 STI chicks were raised by STI mothers (SS chicks) and 32 STI chicks by LTI mothers (SL chicks); (2) 64 control chicks were raised by STI females (CS chicks) and 57 by LTI mothers (CL chicks); (3) 54 LTI chicks were raised by STI females (LS chicks) and 55 by LTI mothers (LL chicks). Previous reports showed that maternal experience had no significant effect on maternal care in domestic hens [28]. Brooding lasts 11 days [16]; mothers were then removed, and young (remained in their sibling group) were tested when they were between 11 and 21 days old. Most test groups included three young. However, due to mortality, some test groups were composed of two chicks. However, proportions of 2-chick groups and 3-chick groups did not differ between sets for the same session (χ2 = 0.49 (LTI chicks); χ2 = 2.71 (C chicks); χ2 = 0.001(STI chicks), df  = 1, p≥0.10 for the three sessions) or between the three sessions (χ2 = 0.33, df  =  2, p>0.80). As in quail morphological sexual dimorphism appears only around 3 weeks old, both male and female chicks were tested in this experiment. However, sex ratios were not different, either for a session (χ2 = 0.044 (LTI chicks); χ2 = 0.57 (C chicks); χ2 = 0.42(STI chicks), df  =  1, p>0.30 for the three sessions): numbers of males and females were similar (mean sex ratio (N males/N females)  =  1.02±0.08), or between the three sessions (χ2 = 0.97, df  = 2, p>0.50). Brooded groups and young groups (after separation from mother) were housed in the same room, in wire-mesh cages (51×40×35 cm) with opaque lateral walls (preventing visual contacts between brooded groups). Each cage contained a drinker, a feeder and a nest box. Water and food were available ad libitum. A 10∶14 hr light:dark cycle and an ambient temperature of 20±1°C were maintained.

Ethological tests, used for poultry, presenting different potentially fearful situations were used to assess the fearfulness of chicks [29]. Indeed, fearfulness is a complex trait and a combination of behavioural tests mainly aiming to induce a state of fear is usually needed to assess the susceptibility of individuals. Chicks were tested after separation from their mothers to avoid disrupting maternal behaviour. The same person performed all the tests and always wore the same clothes. 1. Human-observer test: the experimenter passed (walked slowly) in front of each home cage (approximately 40 cm from the cage door) at 6-min intervals during two 96-min periods, one in the morning and one in the afternoon (a total of 32 scans per cage). Every 6 min, the experimenter recorded instantaneously the number of birds expressing behaviours known to reflect fear that we subsequently called fear behaviours: active fear behaviours include withdrawal (quail move away from the experimenter), and/or violent attempts to escape (quail run about in the cage and jump violently); passive fear behaviours corresponded to behavioural inhibition (low postures corresponding to observations when animals are lying down or crouching, expressed in relation to all observation's postures) [4], [30]. The experimenter also recorded comfort activities (exploration, feeding, preening and resting) that reflect a low level of fear in birds. Other behaviours that do not reflect a particular high or low level of fear were also noted (observation's postures, walk). Quail were tested when they were 19 days old. 2. Hand-on-home-cage-door-test: The procedure of this test was similar to that described for the previous test, but each time the experimenter passed in front of a cage, he placed one hand on the door for 1s and recorded the bird's immediate reaction: active and passive fear behaviours, comfort activities and other observations postures or walk. Quail were tested when they were 21 days old. In these two procedures, birds were tested in their group and in their home-cage. Opaque lateral walls of the cages prevented visual contacts between groups and thereby, any possible effect of a group on the reactions of the neighbouring groups. A particular testing order was used to prevent the birds from seeing the experimenter just before their test.

These tests were carried out in environments that were novel for the chicks. Chicks were caught before each test and carried gently in a wooden box (10×10×10 cm) to the test room. Although these tests involved some contact with the experimenter, cross-test correlations were consistent with other within and between test correlations reported for domestic hens [24], Japanese quail [31] and mammals [29], clearly supporting the notion that these tests revealed general, non-specific fearfulness rather than only stimulus-specific responses. 1. Tonic Immobility test. This protocol was similar to that previously described in the 2nd paragraph of this part. TI induction numbers and TI duration were evaluated in 12-day old birds. TI duration is positively correlated to an animal's fear level [32]. 2. Emergence test. This test followed a protocol similar to that described by Jones et al.[25]. Quail were placed in an opaque wooden box. This box was placed at the entrance of a larger well-lighted experimental box (43×40×48 cm) equipped with an observation window. The transport box was kept closed for 1 min and then left opened for 3 min. The experimenter noted latency of emergence from the wooden box into the experimental box. This parameter is a good estimate of fearfulness: fearful animals take longer to emerge [31], [33]. When a quail had not emerged, a maximum score of 180 s was recorded. When a quail emerged from the box, the experimenter noted its comfort activities and active and passive fear behaviours. Young were tested when they were 14–15 days old. 3. Open-field test. Quail were placed individually in the middle of a wire-netting cylinder (120 cm diameter ×62 cm height) on a linoleum floor, for 5 min. Hidden behind a black curtain with an observation window, the experimenter recorded latency of first step, comfort activities and active and passive fear behaviours. Subjects were 16–17 days old.

Data for birds from a same mothering session were compared statistically. For tests performed on chicks' brood (hand-on-home-cage-door test and human-observer test), frequencies of each behavioural item were weighted by the number of chicks presented (frequency per individual) and used to compare data within a given session (N chicks groups: 21 CL vs 22 CS, 20 LL vs 19 LS, 11 SL vs 16 SS). Synchronisation of siblings' responses to human perturbation was evaluated for hand-on-home-cage-door-test. For that, we compared the frequency of observations (or scans) when at least two of the three chicks performed the same behaviour (active fear behaviour, passive fear behaviour or comfort behaviour) and also the frequency of observations when all chicks were close together (in the same half of home cage). Only data from cages containing three chicks were analysed (N chicks groups: 15 CL vs 20 CS, 15 LL vs 16 LS, 9 SL vs 13 SS). Data from individual tests were used to analyse maternal effect: latencies of behaviour, tonic immobility scores, total occurrence (active fear behaviour, comfort activities) and relative frequencies (passive fear behaviour) (N chicks: 57 CL vs 64 CS, 55 LL vs 54 LS, 45 SL vs 32 SS). Kolmogorov–Smirnov tests were used to determine whether data sets were normally distributed. As data were not all normally distributed, Mann–Whitney U-tests with Bonferroni corrections for multiple comparisons were used. Chi-square tests compared numbers of significant statistical differences observed among lines and mother's types. Frequencies of observations with behavioural synchronisation and with close position were transformed by arc sin square roots and analysed with a two-ways ANOVA and subsequent post-hoc Bonferroni tests. Throughout the text, corrected p-values are reported. Data are presented as means±SEM. All analyses were performed using “Statview 4.5” statistic software (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, USA).

