A pilot survey was conducted among all the 15 police stations of the district of Bamako (police forces data source) and was used to build a list of the health facilities receiving the people injured in road traffic accidents where law enforcement officers intervened (health facility data source). This list included Gabriel Touré Hospital, Hospital of Mali, reference health centers of municipalities I, IV, V and VI and the Sébénincoro and Boulkassoumbougou community health centers in municipalities I and IV, respectively. Private health facilities were not included as they only receive victims transferred from other emergency departments. Reports corresponding to the 1 January, 2012–31 April, 2012 period were selected for the analysis. All 15 police stations of the city of Bamako were provided with a carbon-copy registry in order to collect a copy of all recorded crash reports during the study period. Reports were then coded using a standardized form with variables related to the crash circumstances, to all vehicles and to all individuals involved in a crash in which at least one person was injured, irrespective of the injury severity. All potentially identifying data were collected for matching purposes.

For every crash victim attending one of the selected health facilities, specific data were coded using a standardized form with variables related to the crash circumstances, vehicle, and injury location and severity. All potentially identifying data were collected for matching purposes.

The matching procedure was designed to find records from both data sources corresponding to the same individual and to the same crash event. The procedure consisted of two steps. In a first step an automatic probabilistic linkage was computed attributing scores corresponding to the following weighted variables: crash date, crash time, age, sex, last name, first name, place of discharge, crash district, type of road user. All records that the automatic procedure deemed unmatched were tentatively matched manually.

The number of victims and the number of fatalities were estimated by the capture-recapture method using the Chapman estimator [11] as it is less affected by low sample size. The estimates are given by: N^=(N1+1)(N2+1)n+1−1 N1 and N2 are the number of victims (or fatalities) registered in each respective source n is the number of victims (or fatalities) identified in both sources using the matching procedure. The variance of these estimates used to provide 95% confidence intervals is given by: Var^(N)^=(N1+1)(N2+1)(N1−n)(N2−n)(n+1)(n+1)(n+2) A stratified capture-recapture analysis was performed to assess the impact of potential differential reporting probabilities according to injury severity, gender, age, vehicle involved, type of road user (driver, passenger or pedestrian), place of discharge. The protocol was approved by the Institutional Ethics Committee of the Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry; University of Science, Techniques and Technologies of Bamako; Mali. To participate in this study, participants (patients or guardians) gave their verbal consent. The study was explained to the patient (if conscious) or guardians in the presence of a member of the emergency room staff in each of the study sites. Only participants who consented were enrolled. Written consent was not obtained due to the nature of the study, taking place in an ER and the low literacy rate of the general population it was agreed with ethical committee to limit the consenting process to verbal but it was mentioned in the individual file. Participant consent was recorded by checking "Yes" on the standardized form. The ethics committees of the Faculty of Medicine and Odonto-Stomatology approved this consent procedure. Data collection was approved in writing by the Ministry of Health and Hygiene and by the Ministry of Security and Civil Protection of Mali.

