The methodology is summarised as follows. For each audio recording in our dataset we extract music descriptors by a) filtering out speech segments as detected via a speech/music discriminator algorithm, b) extracting audio descriptors capturing aspects of music style, c) applying feature learning to reduce dimensionality and project the recordings into a similarity space. We optimise parameters and evaluate music similarity in the projected space by a classification task. The projected space is used to identify recordings that are outliers. We refer as ‘outliers’ to the recordings that stand out with respect to the whole set of recordings. Outliers are detected for different sets of features focusing on rhythm, melody, timbre, or harmony and a combination of these. We take into account spatial relations to form geographical neighbourhoods and use these to detect spatial outliers, i.e., recordings that stand out with respect to their neighbours. Lastly, we extract a feature representation for each country by summarising information of its recordings. Hierarchical clustering is used to get an overview of similarity and dissimilarity between countries. The methodology is summarised in Fig 1 and explained in detail in the sections below.

Figure data removed from full text. Figure identifier and caption: 10.1371/journal.pone.0189399.g001 Overview of the methodology. In our analyses we use the country label of a recording as a proxy for music style. We assume that recordings originating from the same country have common musical characteristics and we use this as the ground truth to train our models. However, it is often the case that a music style is not unique to a single country. Music styles may be shared across many countries and a country may exhibit several music styles. The reason for choosing country as the unit of analysis in this study is two-fold: First, country label is the most consistent information available in our music metadata compared to, for example, music genre, language, or culture information (see also Data section). Second, several studies have considered larger geographical regions (e.g., continents or cultural areas) for the comparison of music styles [28, 30, 65]. Country boundaries work in a similar way but provide a more fine-grained unit for analysis. Alternative approaches are discussed further in the Discussion section. We aim to investigate music similarity in a world music corpus. The notion of world music is ambiguous often mixing folk, popular, and classical musics from around the world and from different eras [66]. In this study world music refers to recorded material from folk and traditional music styles from around the world. In particular we focus on field recordings collected by ethnomusicologists since the beginning of the 20th century. Our music dataset is drawn from two large archives, the Smithsonian Folkways Recordings [67] and the World & Traditional music collection from the British Library Sound Archive [68]. Both archives include thousands of music recordings collected over decades of ethnomusicological research. Even though access to large collections of world music recordings is now feasible, the creation of a representative world music corpus is still challenging. An ideal world music corpus would include samples from all inhabited geographical regions and provide information on the spatio-temporal and cultural origins of each music piece. The samples chosen would have to be sufficient to represent the diversity of styles within each music culture and the corpus as a whole should be a balanced collection of music cultures. Given the archives available today, the challenges in corpus creation involve addressing what defines a good sample, how to balance the diverse styles represented in the collection, how to avoid the Western-music bias and how to maximize the size of the corpus. These challenges have also been the main point of criticism for several music comparative studies [69–72]. Our effort to create a world music corpus from the currently available data is described below. We use a subset of the Smithsonian Folkways Recordings collection which consists of more than 40000 audio recordings, including music as well as poetry. It has a large representation from North America (more than 21000 from the United States and around 1400 from Canada). It also includes around 7700 recordings from Eurasia (1700 from the United Kingdom, 800 from Russia, 800 from France), 4200 recordings from South America (Mexico 600, Trinidad and Tobago 400, Peru 400), 2300 from Asia (India 400, Indonesia 400, Philippines 200, China 200), 1900 from Africa (South Africa 200, Ghana 200, Kenya 100), and 400 from Oceania. Recording dates span from 1938 to 2014. We also use a subset of the World & Traditional music collection of the British Library Sound Archive as curated for the purposes of the Digital Music Lab project [8]. This subset consists of more than 29000 audio recordings with a large representation (17000) from the United Kingdom. It also includes around 7300 recordings from Africa (mostly from Uganda 3000), 2300 from Asia (mostly from Nepal 800 and Pakistan 700), and less than 1000 recordings from Oceania, North and South America. Recording dates span from 1898 to 2014. The metadata associated with each music recording include the country where the recording was made and the year it was recorded, the language and sometimes cultural background of the performers, the subject of the music or short description of its purpose, the title, album (if any), and information of the collector or collection it was accessed from. In the above archives there is an unbalanced representation of music cultures, with the majority of recordings originating from Western-colonial areas. What is more, metadata for each recording is not always present or is inconsistent. To create a corpus we sample recordings based on the country information which in this case is more consistent than other culture-related metadata. In order to ensure geographical spread we require recordings from as many countries as possible. We set a minimum requirement of Nmin = 10 recordings from each country and select a maximum of Nmax = 100. Setting the minimum to 10 recordings is a trade-off between allowing under-represented areas to be included in the dataset and having a sufficient number of samples for each country. Although a sample of 10 recordings is too small to represent the diversity of music styles within a country, raising this minimum to e.g. 50 would exclude many of the countries we currently analyse and would limit the geographical scope of the study. Setting the maximum to 100 recordings prevents the over-represented areas from dominating the corpus. We sample at random N recordings from each country, where N is bounded by Nmin and Nmax as explained above. Since the medium of analysis is digitised audio, most of our samples are dated since the 1950s, with the exception of some recordings from the British Library collection dated around 1900 which were digitised from wax cylinders. The duration of audio recordings from the Smithsonian Folkways Recordings collection is restricted to 30 seconds since we use the publicly available 30-second audio previews. For the British Library Sound Archive data we have access to complete recordings but we only sample the first music segments up to a total duration of 30 seconds for consistency with the short audio excerpts of the Smithsonian Folkways collection. Given the above criteria, the final collection consists of a total of 8200 recordings, 6132 from the Smithsonian Folkways Recordings collection and 2068 from the British Library Sound Archive collection. The recordings originate from 137 countries with mean 59.9 and standard deviation 33.8 recordings per country (Fig 2). A total of 67 languages is represented by a minimum of 10 recordings, with a mean of 33.5 and standard deviation of 33.5 recordings per language (Fig 3). The recordings span the years between 1898−2014 with median year 1974 and standard deviation of 17.9 years (Fig 4).

Figure data removed from full text. Figure identifier and caption: 10.1371/journal.pone.0189399.g002 The distribution of countries in our dataset of 8200 world music recordings. Figure data removed from full text. Figure identifier and caption: 10.1371/journal.pone.0189399.g003 The languages in our world music corpus which are represented by a minimum of 10 recordings. Figure data removed from full text. Figure identifier and caption: 10.1371/journal.pone.0189399.g004 The time span of recordings in our world music corpus. Over the years several toolboxes have been developed for music content description [73–76]. Applications of these toolboxes include tasks of automatic classification and retrieval of mainly Eurogenetic music (Related work section). Audio content analysis of world music recordings has additional challenges. First, the audio material is recorded under a variety of recording conditions (live and field recordings), and is preserved to different degrees of fidelity (old and new recording media and equipment). Second, the music is very diverse and music descriptors designed primarily for Eurogenetic music might fail to capture particularities of world music styles. Our audio content analysis process includes a pre-processing step to remove speech segments from the dataset (Pre-processing section) and low-pass filtering to reflect limitations of old recording equipment (Features section). With respect to music descriptors, between specifically designing them as in other comparative music studies [28, 30, 31] and automatically deriving them from the spectrogram [77, 78] we choose a middle ground. We use expert knowledge to derive low-level music representations (Features section) and combine them with feature learning methods (Feature learning section) to adapt the representation to particularities of the music we analyse. Details for each step of the audio content analysis process are provided below. Our dataset consists of field recordings that sometimes mix speech and music segments. We are only interested in music segments but due to the lack of metadata speech segments cannot be filtered out a-priori. An essential pre-processing step is therefore the discrimination between speech and music segments. By speech/music segmentation we refer to the detection of segment boundaries and the classification of the segment as either speech or music. The task of speech/music segmentation has been the focus of several studies in the literature [79–81] and it was also identified as a challenge in the 2015 Music Information Retrieval Evaluation eXchange (MIREX) [82]. We select the best performing algorithm [83] from the MIREX 2015 evaluation. As part of the MIREX 2015 evaluation, the algorithm was tested on a non-overlapping set of British Library recordings which is very similar to the recording collection we use in this study and achieved a frame-based F-measure of 0.89. The algorithm is based on summary statistics of low-level features including Mel frequency cepstrum coefficients (MFCCs), spectral entropy, tonality, and 4 Hertz modulation, and is trained on folk music recordings [84]. We apply this algorithm to detect speech/music segments for all recordings in our dataset and use solely the music segments of each recording for further analysis. In case of long audio excerpts we only select the initial music segments up to a total duration of maximum 30 seconds (see also duration of recordings in Data section).

We are interested in descriptors capturing aspects of world music style. We adopt the notion of music style by Sadie et al. [85], ‘style can be recognized by characteristic uses of form, texture, harmony, melody, and rhythm’. The use of form is ignored in this study as most of our music collection is restricted to short audio excerpts rather than complete recordings. We focus on state of the art descriptors (and adaptations of them) that aim at capturing relevant rhythmic, timbral, melodic, and harmonic content. In particular, we extract onset patterns with the scale transform [86] for rhythm, pitch bi-histograms [87] for melody, average chromagrams [88] for harmony, and Mel frequency cepstrum coefficients (MFCCs) [89] for timbre content description. We choose these descriptors because they define low-level representations of the musical content, i.e., a less detailed representation but one that is more likely to be robust with respect to the diversity of the music styles we consider. In addition, these features achieved state-of-the-art performances in relevant classification and retrieval tasks [14], for example, onset patterns with the scale transform perform best in classifying Western and non-Western rhythms [90, 91] and pitch bi-histograms have been applied successfully in (melody-based) cover song recognition [87]. The audio features used in this study are computed with the following specifications. All recordings in our dataset have a sampling rate of 44100 Hz. For all features we compute the (first) frame decomposition using a window size of 40 ms and hop size of 5 ms. The output of the first frame decomposition is a Mel spectrogram and a chromagram. We use a second frame decomposition to extract descriptors over 8-second windows with 0.5-second hop size. This is particularly useful for rhythmic and melodic descriptors since rhythm and melody are perceived over longer time frames. Rhythmic and melodic descriptors considered in this study are derived from the second frame decomposition with overlapping 8-second windows. Timbral and harmonic descriptors are derived from the first frame decomposition with 0.04-second windows and for consistency with rhythmic and melodic features, they are summarised by their mean and standard deviation over the second frame decomposition with overlapping 8-second windows. The window of the second frame decomposition is hereby termed as ‘texture window’ [25]. The window size w of the texture window was set to 8 seconds after the parameter optimisation process described in the Parameter optimisation section. For all features we use a cutoff frequency at 8000 Hz since most of the older recordings do not contain higher frequencies than that. The audio content analysis process is summarised in Fig 5.

Figure data removed from full text. Figure identifier and caption: 10.1371/journal.pone.0189399.g005 Overview of the audio content analysis process.Mel-spectrograms and chromagrams are processed in overlapping 8-second frames to extract rhythmic, timbral, harmonic, and melodic features. Feature learning is applied to the 8-second features and average pooling across time yields the representations for further analysis.

Rhythm and Timbre. For rhythm and timbre features we compute a Mel spectrogram with 40 Mel bands up to 8000 Hz using Librosa [76]. To describe rhythmic content we extract onset strength envelopes for each Mel band and compute rhythmic periodicities using a second Fourier transform with window size of 8 seconds and hop size of 0.5 seconds. We then apply the Mellin transform to achieve tempo invariance [90] and output rhythmic periodicities up to 960 beats per minute (bpm). The output is averaged across low and high frequency Mel bands with cutoff at 1758 Hz. The resulting rhythmic feature vector has length 400 values. Timbral aspects are characterised by 20 MFCCs and 20 first-order delta coefficients after removing the DC component [89]. We take the mean and standard deviation of these coefficients over 8-second windows with 0.5-second hop size. This results in a total of 80 feature values describing timbral aspects. Harmony and Melody. To describe harmonic content we compute chromagrams using variable-Q transforms [92] up to 8000 Hz with 5 ms hop size and 20-cent pitch resolution to allow for microtonality. Chromagrams are aligned to the pitch class of the maximum magnitude per recording for key invariance. Harmonic content is described by the mean and standard deviation of chroma vectors using 8-second windows with 0.5-second hop size. The dimensionality of the harmonic feature vector results in a total of 120 values. To describe melodic content we extract pitch contours from polyphonic music signals using a method based on a time-pitch salience function [93]. The pitch contours are converted to 20-cent resolution binary chroma vectors with entries of 1, whenever a pitch estimate is active at a given time, and 0 otherwise. Melodic aspects are captured via pitch bi-histograms which denote counts of transitions of pitch classes [87]. We use a window of d = 0.5 seconds to look for pitch class transitions in the binary chroma vectors. The resulting pitch bi-histogram matrix consists of 3600 = 60 × 60 values corresponding to pitch transitions with 20-cent pitch resolution. For efficient storage and processing, the matrix is decomposed using non-negative matrix factorisation [94]. We keep 2 basis vectors with their corresponding activations to represent melodic content. It was estimated that keeping only 2 bases was enough to provide sufficient reconstruction for most pitch bi-histogram matrices in our dataset (average reconstruction error < 25%). Pitch bi-histograms are also computed over 8-second windows with 0.5-second hop size. This results in a total of 120 feature values describing melodic aspects. Combining all features together results in a total of 840 descriptors for each recording in our dataset. A z-score standardisation of the 840 features is applied across all recordings before further processing.

For the low-level descriptors presented in the Features section we aim to learn high-level representations that best characterise music style similarity. Feature learning is also appropriate for reducing dimensionality, an essential step for the amount of data we analyse. We learn feature representations from the 8-second frame-based descriptors. In our analysis we consider the country label of a recording as a proxy for style and use this for supervised training and cross-validating our methods. There are numerous feature learning techniques to choose from in the literature. Non-linear models such as neural networks usually require large training data sets [95]. We have a fairly limited number of audio recordings and our low-level descriptors partly incorporate expert knowledge of the music (section Features). In this case, simpler feature learning techniques are more suitable for the amount and type of data we have. We explore the applicability of 4 linear models trained in supervised and unsupervised fashions. The audio features are standardised using z-scores and aggregated to a single feature vector for each 8-second frame of a recording. Feature representations are learned using Principal Component Analysis (PCA), Non-Negative Matrix Factorisation (NMF), Semi-Supervised Non-Negative Matrix Factorisation (SSNMF), and Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) methods [94]. PCA and NMF are unsupervised methods and try to extract components that account for the most variance in the data without any prior information on the data classes. LDA is a supervised method and tries to identify attributes that account for the most variance between classes (in this case country labels). SSNMF works similarly to NMF with the difference that ground truth labels are taken into account in addition to the data matrix in the optimisation step [96]. We split the 8200 recordings of our collection into training (60%), validation (20%), and testing (20%) sets. We train and test our models on the frame-based descriptors; this results in a dataset of 325435, 106632, and 107083 frames for training, validation, and testing, respectively. Frames used for training do not belong to the same recordings as frames used for testing or validation and vice versa. We use the training set to train the PCA, NMF, SSNMF, and LDA models and the validation set to optimise the parameters. In each experiment we retain components constituting to 99% of the variance. In the Results section we analyse the feature weights for the components of the best performing feature learning method. A classification task is used to assess the quality of the learned space and optimise the parameters. An ideal music similarity space separates well data points belonging to different music classes and good classification results can be achieved with simple classifiers. We are not interested to build a powerful classifier since our primary aim is to assess the learned embeddings and not to optimise the classification task itself. We therefore focus on classifiers widely used in the machine learning community [97]. We train 4 classifiers, K-Nearest Neighbour (KNN), Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), Support Vector Machines (SVM), and Random Forest (RF), to predict the country label of a recording. The purpose of the classification task is to optimise the window size w of the audio descriptors and assess the quality of the learned spaces in order to select the optimal feature learning method for our data. We use the classification F-score metric to compare the performance of the models. In the Results section we also analyse the coefficients of the best performing classifier. In order to assess the contribution of different features to the classification task we consider 5 sets of features: a) scale transform (rhythmic) b) MFCCs (timbral), c) average chroma vectors (harmonic), d) pitch bi-histograms (melodic), and e) the combination of all the above. In each case, feature learning is applied on the selected feature set and frame-based projections are aggregated using the mean prior to classification. We also tested for aggregation using the mean and standard deviation of frame-based descriptors but this did not improve results; hence it was omitted. In the case of testing the combination of all features (e), we first reduce dimensionality for each feature set separately and then concatenate the components from all feature sets before mean aggregation and classification. Results for the feature learning optimisation and classification experiments are presented in the Results section.

The feature learning and classification methods described above (Feature learning section) identify the optimal projection for the data. In the next step of the analysis we use the projected space to investigate music dissimilarity and identify outliers in the dataset. A recording is considered an outlier if it is distinct compared to the whole set of recordings. We detect outliers based on a method of squared Mahalanobis distances [13, 98]. Using Mahalanobis, a high-dimensional feature vector is expressed as the distance to the mean of the distribution in standard deviation units. Let X∈RI×J denote the set of observations for I recordings and J features. The Mahalanobis distance for observation xi = (x1, x2, …, xJ)T for recording i from the set of observations X with mean μ = (μ1, μ2, …, μJ)T and covariance matrix S is denoted DM(xi)=(xi-μ)TS-1(xi-μ). (1) Data points that lie beyond a threshold, typically set to the q = 97.5% quantile of the chi-square distribution with J degrees of freedom [99], are considered outliers. This is denoted O={i∈H|DM(xi)>χJ,q2}(2) where H = {1, 2, …, I} denotes the index of the observations. Due to the high dimensionality of our feature vectors every data point can be considered far from the centre of the distribution [100]. To compensate for a possible large amount of outliers we consider a higher threshold based on the q = 99.9% quantile of the chi-square distribution. To gain a better understanding of the type of outliers for each country we detect outliers using a) rhythmic, b) timbral, c) harmonic, and d) melodic features. For example, for JR the dimensionality of the rhythmic feature vector and XR∈RI×JR the set of observations, the set of outlier recordings with respect to rhythmic characteristics is denoted OR={i∈H|DM(xR,i)>χJR,99.92}(3) for observation xR,i ∈ XR. We detect outliers with respect to rhythmic (OR), timbral (OT), melodic (OM), and harmonic (OH) characteristics.

In the previous section outliers were detected by comparing a recording to all other recordings in the dataset. Here we take into account spatial relations and compare recordings from a given country only to recordings of its neighbouring countries. In this way we are able to identify spatial outliers, i.e. recordings that are outliers compared to their spatial neighbours [57]. We construct spatial neighbourhoods based on contiguity and distance criteria: a) two countries are neighbours if they share a border (a vertex or an edge of their polygon shape), b) if a country doesn’t border with any other country (e.g., the country is an island) its neighbours are defined by the 3 closest countries estimated via the Euclidean distance between the geographical coordinates (latitude and longitude) of the centre of each country. Let Ni denote the set of neighbours for country i estimated via Ni={j∈{1,…,R}|jisneighbourtoi}(4) for R the number of countries. The spatial neighbourhood is represented as a weight matrix W∈RR×R where entry wij ∈ W is non-zero whenever country j is neighbour to country i. This is denoted wij={1ni,ifj∈Ni0,otherwise(5) where ni = |Ni| denotes the total number of neighbours for country i. By definition, weight matrix W is row-standardized, ∑j=1Rwij=1. Table in S1 Table provides the neighbours of each country as estimated via this approach. The geographical boundaries of each country are derived from spatial data available via the Natural Earth platform [101]. The set of recordings from a given country is appended with recordings from neighbouring countries as defined by the country’s spatial neighbourhood (S1 Table). This set is used to detect outliers with the Mahalanobis distance as defined in Eq 2. Spatial outliers are detected in this manner for all countries in our dataset.

The unit of analysis in the previous sections was the individual recordings. In this section we move one level up and place the focus at the country. We detect outlier countries in a similar manner as before where country features now summarise the information of the underlying recordings. The advantage of placing the focus at the country level is that the feature representations can now summarise the variety of styles that exist in the music of a country. Outliers are not judged by individual recordings but rather by the distribution of the whole set of recordings of each country. We use K-means clustering to map recording representations to one of K clusters. The country representation is then derived from a histogram count of the K clusters of its recordings. Let X∈RI×J denote the set of observations for I recordings and J features. We compute K-means for X and map recordings to one of K clusters. We use a linear encoding function f:RJ→RK so that each recording representation xi∈RJ for i = 1, …, I is mapped to a vector x^i∈RK via the dot product between xi and the cluster centroids mk∈RJ for k = 1, …, K clusters. The feature vector for a country cr∈RK is the normalised histogram count of K clusters for recordings i from country r, denoted cr′=∑if(xi). (6) Each histogram is normalised to the unit norm, where cr=cr′∥cr′∥. Let C∈RR×K denote the feature representations for R countries and K clusters derived as explained above. The optimal number K of clusters is decided based on the silhouette score [102] after evaluating K-means for K between 10 and 30 clusters. We estimate similarity between countries via hierarchical clustering [103]. For consistency with the previous outlier detection method (section Outliers at the recording level), we use Mahalanobis distance to estimate pairwise similarity between countries. Pairwise Mahalanobis distance between countries is denoted DM(ci,cj)=(ci-cj)TS¯-1(ci-cj)(7) where S¯ is the covariance matrix and i, j ∈ {1, 2, …, R}. A hierarchy of countries is constructed using the average distance between sets of observations as the linkage criterion.

