Participants were drawn from the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study, a large, ongoing, prospective cohort study designed to investigate the etiology of atherosclerosis and disease outcomes of adults residing in four U.S. communities: Baltimore, Maryland; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Jackson, Mississippi; and Winston-Salem, North Carolina. Approximately 4,000 individuals aged 45–64 years old were enrolled at each ARIC site between 1987 and 1989 [11,12]. All participants signed an informed consent document. Baseline de-identified ARIC data from 14,812 participants with and without T2DM were obtained from BioLINCC (https://biolincc.nhlbi.nih.gov/home/) [13]. The current secondary data analysis was approved by the Augusta University (formerly Medical College of Georgia) Institutional Review Board.

T2DM was the outcome variable, defined according to the American Diabetes Association criteria [14] by one or more the following: fasting blood glucose ≥ 126mg/dL, non-fasting blood glucose ≥ 200 mg/dL, self-reported diabetes diagnosis, or taking diabetes medications. Diabetes status and anthropometric data were collected with each study visit. The following seven anthropometric measures were included in our analysis: a body shape index [ABSI = waist circumference (cm) / (BMI0.66 x height (m)0.5)], body adiposity index [BAI = hip circumference (cm) / ((height (m)1.5) -18)], body mass index [BMI = body weight (kg) / height (m2)], waist circumference [WC, cm], waist to hip ratio [WHR = waist circumference (cm) / hip circumference (cm)], waist to height ratio [WHtR = waist circumference (cm) / height (cm)], and waist to hip to height ratio [WHHR = WC (cm) / (hip circumference (cm)/ height (cm))]. These variables were calculated from body weight, height, WC, and hip circumference measured in the fasted state, in light clothing without shoes, by trained ARIC technicians. WC was measured using an anthropometric tape at the level of the umbilicus with the participant standing [15]. Hip circumference was measured at the maximal protrusion of the buttocks. Race identification and gender were self-reported. Age (continuous) was the only variable considered for covariate adjustment. We tested the inclusion of variables for cigarette smoking (current, former, never (yes/no)) and alcohol intake (g/day) in the models. However, these variables did not appreciably decrease the Akaike Information Criteria (AIC) of their respective models, and therefore were excluded from the final analysis. Physical activity using the sports domain of the Baecke questionnaire responses [16] collected at visits one and three only, and highest education level completed (<high school, high school graduate to some college or vocational school graduate, and ≥ college graduate), collected at visit one only were used to describe the sample population at baseline, but were not included in the final analysis because they were not collected at all four study visits. Other participant characteristics used to describe the sample population at baseline, but not included in the final analysis were fasting blood glucose, total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, triglycerides, and use of blood pressure medications (yes/no). Time to development of T2DM (cases) and survival time for non-cases were used in analyses.

Participants were excluded from analysis if they had diabetes at baseline (n = 1808), if they were missing baseline data for anthropometric measures (n = 14), or did not return for any follow-up visits (n = 869). The remaining sample for analysis consisted of 12,121 participants. For each race-gender group, all anthropometric measures were converted to Z-scores using the following equation: Z-score = (individual anthropometric value—group mean)/ group SD anthropometric value. We used repeated measures Cox proportional hazard regression analysis to determine the risk of developing T2DM for each anthropometric measure. Survival time for development of T2DM was calculated with right-censoring as the mid-point of the time-interval from the visit when the participant was a non-case to the visit when they first met the criteria for diabetes. Time accumulated to the end of the study was calculated for participants who remained non-cases or were lost to follow-up in our sample. All seven anthropometric measures plus age, diabetes status, and survival time were available at all four study visits. The AIC was used to assess the quality of the estimate with the step-wise addition of age in each anthropometric model. Anthropometric measures with the smallest AIC values were considered best-fit anthropometric measure models within race-gender groups. Harrell’s C-index, a rank parameter, was used as a measure of general predictive power of the Cox proportional regression model [17]. Harrell’s C-index was constructed by regressing T2DM on each anthropometric measure adjusted for age in separate anthropometric models, then assessing the fit of the model. Anthropometric models with the highest Harrell’s C-index concordance areas were chosen as the best-fit discriminators of anthropometric measures within race-gender groups. To determine the anthropometric measures with the highest associations, we ranked the hazard ratios within race-gender groups by their magnitude of effect from most to least, and contrasted this with their corresponding Harrell’s C-indexes. We further tested the equality of Harrell’s C-index concordance areas of the pair-wise comparable discriminatory ability of the best-fit anthropometric measure with each of the other anthropometric measures (six pairs) within race-gender groups, by examining the Harrell’s C-index and its p value [17] with Bonferroni correction for multiple testing [18] Statistical analyses were conducted using Stata MP, Version 14.0 (StataCorp, College Station, Texas, U.S.). For most analyses, p <0.05 was considered statistically significant; for Bonferroni multiple comparisons testing [18], p < 0.008 (0.05/6) was used. All analyses for time-to development of T2DM, including hazard ratios, Harrell’s C-indexes, and AIC statistics were bootstrapped 5000 times with robust covariance structure and the efron method of ties.

