Blood lactate curve data in this paper were generated in a previously published study. [12] Briefly, the study was a double-blind, randomized, placebo controlled, parallel, single centre trial to evaluate the effects of recombinant human erythropoietin (rHuEPO) in forty-eight healthy male cyclists aged 18 to 50. Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the study. The study was approved by the Independent Ethics Committee of the Foundation Evaluation of Ethics in Biomedical Research (Stichting Beoordeling Ethiek Biomedisch Onderzoek, Assen, Netherlands). The study is registered in the Dutch Trial Registry (Nederlands Trial Register), number NTR5643. For inclusion, participants had to be well-trained, as evaluated by a maximum power-to-weight ratio during the GXT at screening that should exceed 4 W/kg. During the eleven week study duration, twenty-four participants received weekly rHuEPO injections and twenty-four received placebo injections for eight weeks. Participants had to maintain their regular training schedule during the study.

Five GXTs were performed on a Monark LC4r ergometer (COSMED, Rome, Italy) with approximately 2-week intervals between each test, see Fig 1. After a two-minute warm-up at 75 Watts, the GXT dictated an increase in pedalling resistance to 175 Watts, which increased by an additional 25 Watts every five minutes. Between 4:15 and 4:45 into each step and immediately after termination of the exercise test, blood was drawn to measure bLa. Gas exchange was measured using a Quark CPET system (COSMED, Rome, Italy) and breath-by-breath sampling technology. During the test cadence had to be maintained between 70 and 90 rpm. The test terminated when cadence could not be maintained above 70 rpm or when a participant stopped the test.

Figure data removed from full text. Figure identifier and caption: 10.1371/journal.pone.0206846.g001 Study design.Study design showing timing of different tests. Time point 0 weeks indicates start of treatment (rHuEPO or placebo) for all participants. GXT, graded exercise test; TT, time trial test; RR, road race.

During the GXTs blood for lactate determination was drawn via an IV cannula (Venflon 7 Pro Safety, BD, Switzerland) with a 30 cm extension set between the cannula and a three way stopcock for blood sampling in the antecubital vein. Before the first and after every sampling the stopcock and extension set were flushed with 2 mL saline. Before blood sampling 0.5 mL was withdrawn from the stopcock to remove any remaining saline. Next, 1 mL of blood was taken from the stopcock. Within ten seconds from withdrawal the blood was placed on the Lactate Pro 2 (Arkray, Kyoto, Japan) strip which was then inserted in the Lactate Pro 2 device. The same device was used throughout the whole study and was given at least 20 minutes to adjust to the room temperature before sampling.

The time trial tests were performed twice on the same ergometer used for the GXT, with the first (TT1) 3–8 days after the first GXT and the second (TT2) one week after GXT four. Participants were instructed to produce the highest mean power output during a 45-minute period at a cadence of 70–90 rpm, attempting to mimic competitive cycling time trials. At the start of the test pedalling resistance was set at 80% of the maximal power reached during GXT1. Participants could adjust the power by indicating to increase or decrease in power by steps of 10 Watts. They were informed of the remaining time on a regular basis during the test.

Approximately one week after the last GXT participants competitively climbed the Mont Ventoux (Vaucluse département, France) via Bédoin, a climb of approximately 21.5 km with an average gradient of 7.5%. The race was preceded by a stage of 110 km in the French Provence (total elevation gain 1524 m) that was completed collectively. Racing bikes of participants were equipped with a Single Leg Power Meter SGY-PM910H2 (Pioneer Europe, Antwerp, Belgium) with Shimano Ultegra 6800 crank (Shimano, Osaka, Japan) to log power data on the bicycle during the race. Data were uploaded to the dedicated database Cyclo-Sphere.

The BLCs from the GXTs were then used to calculate several representative LT concepts. Concepts were selected as follows: First, published concepts were retrieved from a review by Faude et al. [9] and by a literature research within the PubMed database. The database was searched for the search terms ‘lactate threshold’, ‘aerobic threshold’, ‘anaerobic threshold’, ‘endurance performance’ or ‘maximal lactate steady state’ or similar terms in different combinations. The references of the selected articles were searched for further relevant articles. Secondly, retrieved concepts were divided into seven different categories, see S1 Table. A few retrieved concepts could not be implemented, reasons being lacking lactate concentrations in the recovery phase after exercise and no availability of the full text article describing the method of the concept despite various efforts obtaining it. (S1 Table, listed under “not selected categories”). From each remaining category, concepts that were representative and were used frequently in other research were selected. If there were multiple concepts in one category that were commonly used and fundamentally different in methodology, more than one concept of that category was included in the analysis. Selecting multiple commonly used, but very similar concepts from one category was not deemed useful for the purpose of this study. This resulted in a final selection of eight concepts from the five implementable categories for analysis in our study.

Implementation of lactate threshold concepts: All selected concepts were implemented according to the articles that described the concept (S1 Table). When exact reproduction of the method was not feasible due to the use of different parameters (e.g. running velocity was used), we approximated the description as close as possible (e.g. we used power output). For concepts that required data fitting of the blood lactate curve a third-order polynomial was chosen, based on the shape of the blood lactate curve data and given that it is a proven method, although there is no generally accepted method for data fitting. [9] An example of a blood lactate curve with a depiction of all lactate threshold concepts is shown in Fig 2.

Figure data removed from full text. Figure identifier and caption: 10.1371/journal.pone.0206846.g002 Graphical representation of lactate threshold concepts.Example of a blood lactate curve with the location of the different lactate threshold concepts for this particular curve. Open circles: observed blood lactate values at each exercise intensity; Black curve: third-order polynomial; Grey dashed line: baseline; Green circle and arrow: LT1, observer-determined first rise in blood lactate; Yellow circle and arrow: LT2, first observed blood lactate value more than 1 mmol/L above baseline; Pink circle and arrow: LT3, minimum lactate equivalent (blood lactate divided by power) plus 1.5 mmol/L; Purple circle and arrow: LT4, first blood lactate value that shows an increase of at least 1 mmol/L; Orange circle and arrow: LT5, minimum lactate equivalent (blood lactate divided by VO2); Brown circle and arrow and dashed line: LT-4mmol, value at 4 mmol/L; Red circle and arrow and dashed line: Dmax, value with the maximum perpendicular distance to the polynomial from the dashed line; Blue circle and arrow and dashed line: Dmax-mod, value with the maximum perpendicular distance to the polynomial from the dashed line.

Similar to what Tanaka described [13] we plotted bLa (mmol/L) versus power (W). Three authors (JH, WdMK and PG) were asked to independently select the first point in the BLC that marks a substantial increase above resting level. LT1 was defined as the power value corresponding to the point selected by at least two researchers, or in cases without consensus, the three researchers discussed until consensus was reached.

Coyle et al. [14] determined LT as 1 mmol/L above a visually determined baseline in the BLC. We took the lactate measurement chosen as LT1 and calculated the mean of the measurements preceding this point to create an average baseline value. The power value belonging to the first measured lactate value after baseline that supersedes the baseline value plus 1 mmol/L was considered LT2.

As Dickhuth et al., [15] we determined the minimum lactate equivalent (the lowest value when bLa is divided by work intensity) using third-order polynomial fitting and added 1.5 mmol/L to the corresponding bLa, termed individual anaerobic threshold in the paper, to find the power value on the fitted polynomial of the BLC and termed it LT3.

As described by Amann et al., [16] we calculated the first rise of 1 mmol/L or more between two bLa measurements where the next rise was similar or larger than 1 mmol/L. The measurement that preceded this first increase was considered LT4.

Based on the method described by Dickhuth et al., [17] we divided bLa (mmol/L) by the 30 second average VO2 (mL/min/kg) and plotted it against power. These values were interpolated with a third-order polynomial and the power value at the lowest point in this curve was considered LT5.

A widely used concept is the LT-4mmol method, as described for example by Sjodin et al. [18] The power in the interpolated third-order polynomial BLC that corresponds to a bLa of 4 mmol/L was considered LT-4mmol.

Similar to the method proposed by Cheng et al., [19] we plotted bLa versus power, interpolated with a third-order polynomial and plotted a line from the first measurement to the last measurement. The point in the interpolated BLC that has the maximum perpendicular distance with that line was considered Dmax. A modified version as described by Bishop et al., [20] uses the measurement that precedes an increase of at least 0.4 mmol/L instead of the first bLa measurement to draw the line to the last measurement, which is termed Dmax modified (Dmax-mod).

Data was stored in a validated database system (Promasys, Omnicomm Inc., Fort Lauderdale, USA) and checked for accuracy and completeness. Blinded data review before code-breaking and analysis was performed according to a standard procedure at our unit. This included evaluating whether the GXT was performed to maximal ability, which was based on power, VO2 and bLa values and report by the subject.

We used statistical software R version 3.4.0 [21] to plot measurements, calculate the third-order polynomial that best fits the data using polynomial regression with the R-function lm(y~poly(3)), implement the LT concepts and perform the statistical testing. R was used with the following packages: dplyr 0.5.0, [22] psych 1.7.5, [23] tidyr 0.6.3. [24] Data of all subjects enrolled in the study were used in the analysis. To measure repeatability we determined the weighted intra-subject coefficient of variation (CV) and the Cronbach’s alpha based on the five GXT results for each LT concept. Weighted intra-subject CV was calculated correcting for missing values (CV based on the sum of the variance per subject multiplied by the amount of measurements, divided by the total amount of measurements). Both the weighted intra-subject CV and Cronbach’s alpha were calculated only using data from participants receiving placebo, as there might have been longitudinal effects of rHuEPO treatment on the GXTs.

For the predictive properties we calculated the Pearson correlation between each LT concept and the mean power of the corresponding relevant endurance parameter. The LT concept from the GXT closest in time to the endurance tests TT1 and TT2 and road race (see Fig 1), namely GXT 1, 4 and 5 respectively, were used for correlations between the LT concept and corresponding average power output. In addition, the difference between each measurement pair was calculated and averaged to create the mean difference between the LT concept and endurance test power. This value indicates how the power at the LT concept translates to average endurance power in a time trial or race. For these Pearson correlation and mean difference analyses both subjects receiving rHuEPO and placebo were included. This was done as LT concepts are designed to be a predictive parameter for endurance exercise, which should be irrespective of a subject being treated with rHuEPO or not. In addition, given that the measurements of each pair are at most a week apart, no changes in the LT concept or endurance performance are expected due to rHuEPO. Moreover, GXT1 and TT1 were performed before starting the treatment period, and no rHuEPO administrations took place between GXT5 and the race. For these analyses therefore no treatment effect was expected and pooling was considered appropriate.

